
1. Dev Dyn. 2014 Nov;243(11):1391-400. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24165. Epub 2014 Aug 1.

The homeodomain transcription factor PITX2 is required for specifying correct
cell fates and establishing angiogenic privilege in the developing cornea.

Gage PJ(1), Kuang C, Zacharias AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

BACKGROUND: Correct specification of cell lineages and establishing angiogenic
privilege within the developing cornea are essential for normal vision but the
mechanisms controlling these processes are poorly understood.
RESULTS: We show that the homeodomain transcription factor PItX2 is expressed in 
mesenchymal cells of the developing and mature cornea and use a temporal gene
knockout approach to demonstrate that PITX2 is required for corneal morphogenesis
and the specification of cell fates within the surface ectoderm and mesenchymal
primordia. PITX2 is also required to establish angiogenic privilege in the
developing cornea. Further, the expression of Dkk2 and suppression of canonical
Wnt signaling activity levels are key mechanisms by which PITX2 specifies ocular 
surface ectoderm as cornea. In contrast, specifying the underlying mesenchyme to 
corneal fates and establishing angiogenic privilege in the cornea are less
sensitive to DKK2 activity. Finally, the cellular expression patterns of FOXC2,
PITX1, and BARX2 in Pitx2 and Dkk2 mutants suggest that these transcription
factors may be involved in specifying cell fate and establishing angiogenic
privilege within the corneal mesenchyme. However, they are unlikely to play a
role in specifying cell fate within the corneal ectoderm.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these data provide important insights into the mechanisms 
regulating cornea development.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4206698
PMID: 25044936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Stem Cells. 2014 Jun;32(6):1661-73. doi: 10.1002/stem.1674.

Barx2 and Pax7 have antagonistic functions in regulation of wnt signaling and
satellite cell differentiation.

Zhuang L(1), Hulin JA, Gromova A, Tran Nguyen TD, Yu RT, Liddle C, Downes M,
Evans RM, Makarenkova HP, Meech R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University, Bedford Park,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

The canonical Wnt signaling pathway is critical for myogenesis and can induce
muscle progenitors to switch from proliferation to differentiation; how Wnt
signals integrate with muscle-specific regulatory factors in this process is
poorly understood. We previously demonstrated that the Barx2 homeobox protein
promotes differentiation in cooperation with the muscle regulatory factor (MRF)
MyoD. Pax7, another important muscle homeobox factor, represses differentiation. 
We now identify Barx2, MyoD, and Pax7 as novel components of the Wnt effector
complex, providing a new molecular pathway for regulation of muscle progenitor
differentiation. Canonical Wnt signaling induces Barx2 expression in muscle
progenitors and perturbation of Barx2 leads to misregulation of Wnt target genes.
Barx2 activates two endogenous Wnt target promoters as well as the Wnt reporter
gene TOPflash, the latter synergistically with MyoD. Moreover, Barx2 interacts
with the core Wnt effectors ß-catenin and T cell-factor 4 (TCF4), is recruited to
TCF/lymphoid enhancer factor sites, and promotes recruitment of ß-catenin. In
contrast, Pax7 represses the Wnt reporter gene and antagonizes the activating
effect of Barx2. Pax7 also binds ß-catenin suggesting that Barx2 and Pax7 may
compete for interaction with the core Wnt effector complex. Overall, the data
show for the first time that Barx2, Pax7, and MRFs can act as direct
transcriptional effectors of Wnt signals in myoblasts and that Barx2 and Wnt
signaling participate in a regulatory loop. We propose that antagonism between
Barx2 and Pax7 in regulation of Wnt signaling may help mediate the switch from
myoblast proliferation to differentiation.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4134105
PMID: 24753152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Hepatol Res. 2015 Jan;45(2):228-37. doi: 10.1111/hepr.12340. Epub 2014 Jun 30.

Low expression of BARX2 in human primary hepatocellular carcinoma correlates with
metastasis and predicts poor prognosis.

Zhang Y(1), Zhang JX, Huang LL, He LJ, Liao YJ, Lai YR, Deng HX, Tian XP, Kung
HF, Xie D, Zhu SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou.

AIM: The homeobox gene Barx2 was recently identified as a regulator of ovarian
and breast cancer; however, the expression level of BARX2 and its significance in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remain unknown.
METHODS: Protein and mRNA expression levels of Barx2 were examined using Western 
blotting and real-time PCR respectively, in paired HCC tissue and matched
adjacent non-cancerous tissue from 12 patients. The expression levels of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers were also detected in relation to
BARX2 expression. Lastly, immunohistochemistry for BARX2 was also performed on a 
tissue microarray containing 231 HCC tissue samples.
RESULTS: We observed that BARX2 expression was lower in HCC tissues compared to
matching adjacent non-cancerous tissue. The low expression level of BARX2 was
significantly correlated with metrics of tumor size, tumor differentiation,
clinical stage, metastasis and relapse. Furthermore, the patients with low BARX2 
expression had adverse survival outcomes. Importantly, multivariate Cox
regression analysis revealed that low BARX2 expression was an independent marker 
for lower overall survival (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007). Moreover, a significant negative
relationship was observed between the expression of BARX2 and markers of EMT.
CONCLUSION: These findings provide evidence that the low expression level of
BARX2 in HCC is significantly correlated with tumor metastasis, and that BARX2
may be an independent prognostic biomarker for patients with HCC.

© 2014 The Japan Society of Hepatology.

PMID: 24716715  [PubMed]


4. Gene Expr Patterns. 2013 Oct;13(7):255-64. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2013.05.001. Epub
2013 May 15.

Establishment of crown-root domain borders in mouse incisor.

Juuri E(1), Saito K, Lefebvre S, Michon F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Developmental Biology Program, University of
Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.

Teeth are composed of two domains, the enamel-covered crown and the enamel-free
root. The understanding of the initiation and regulation of crown and root domain
formation is important for the development of bioengineered teeth. In most teeth 
the crown develops before the root, and erupts to the oral cavity whereas the
root anchors the tooth to the jawbone. However, in the continuously growing mouse
incisor the crown and root domains form simultaneously, the crown domain forming 
the labial and the root domain the lingual part of the tooth. While the
crown-root border on the incisor distal side supports the distal enamel extent,
reflecting an evolutionary diet adaptation, on the incisor mesial side the
root-like surface is necessary for the attachment of the interdental ligament
between the two incisors. Therefore, the mouse incisor exhibits a functional
distal-mesial asymmetry. Here, we used the mouse incisor as a model to understand
the mechanisms involved in the crown-root border formation. We analyzed the
cellular origins and gene expression patterns leading to the development of the
mesial and distal crown-root borders. We discovered that Barx2, En1, Wnt11, and
Runx3 were exclusively expressed on the mesial crown-root border. In addition,
the distal border of the crown-root domain might be established by cells from a
different origin and by an early Follistatin expression, factor known to be
involved in the root domain formation. The use of different mechanisms to
establish domain borders gives indications of the incisor functional asymmetry.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23684768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Dev Biol. 2012 Dec 15;372(2):217-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.09.015. Epub 2012 
Sep 27.

A cis-element in the Notch1 locus is involved in the regulation of gene
expression in interneuron progenitors.

Tzatzalos E(1), Smith SM, Doh ST, Hao H, Li Y, Wu A, Grumet M, Cai L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Rutgers University, 599 Taylor Road,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Interneurons comprise approximately one third of the total cortical neurons in
the mammalian cerebral cortex. Studies have revealed many details in the
generation of this cell type. However, the mechanism that defines
interneuron-lineage specific gene expression is not well understood. Gene
regulatory elements, e.g., promoters, enhancers, and trans-acting factors, are
essential for the proper control of gene expression. Here, we report that a novel
evolutionarily conserved cis-element in the second intron of the Notch1 locus
plays an important role in regulating gene expression in interneuron progenitors.
The spatiotemporal activity of the cis-element in the developing central nervous 
system (CNS) was determined by both transient reporter expression in the
developing chick and a transgenic mouse model. Its activity is well correlated
with neurogenesis in both the chick and mouse and restricted to neural progenitor
cells in the ganglionic eminence that are fated to differentiate into GABAergic
interneurons of the neocortex. We further demonstrate that the cis-element
activity requires the binding motif for trans-acting factors Gsh1/Barx2/Brn3.
Deletion of this binding motif abolishes reporter gene expression. Together,
these data provide new insights into the regulatory mechanisms of interneuron
development in the vertebrate CNS.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3518388
PMID: 23022658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Int Rev Cell Mol Biol. 2012;297:117-73. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394308-8.00004-2.

Barx homeobox family in muscle development and regeneration.

Makarenkova HP(1), Meech R.

Author information: 
(1)The Neurobiology Department, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California,
USA.

Homeobox transcription factors are key intrinsic regulators of myogenesis. In
studies spanning several years, we have characterized the homeobox factor Barx2
as a novel marker for muscle progenitor cells and an important regulator of
muscle growth and repair. In this review, we place the expression and function of
Barx2 and its paralogue Barx1 in context with other muscle-expressed homeobox
factors in both embryonic and adult myogenesis. We also describe the structure
and regulation of Barx genes and possible gene/disease associations. The
functional domains of Barx proteins, their molecular interactions, and cellular
functions are presented with particular emphasis on control of genes and
processes involved in myogenic differentiation. Finally, we describe the patterns
of Barx gene expression in vivo and the phenotypes of various Barx gene
perturbation models including null mice. We focus on the Barx2 null mouse model, 
which has demonstrated the critical roles of Barx2 in postnatal myogenesis
including muscle maintenance during aging, and regeneration of acute and chronic 
muscle injury.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22608559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Stem Cells. 2012 Feb;30(2):253-65. doi: 10.1002/stem.777.

Barx2 is expressed in satellite cells and is required for normal muscle growth
and regeneration.

Meech R(1), Gonzalez KN, Barro M, Gromova A, Zhuang L, Hulin JA, Makarenkova HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University, Bedford Park, South 
Australia, Australia.

Muscle growth and regeneration are regulated through a series of spatiotemporally
dependent signaling and transcriptional cascades. Although the transcriptional
program controlling myogenesis has been extensively investigated, the full
repertoire of transcriptional regulators involved in this process is far from
defined. Various homeodomain transcription factors have been shown to play
important roles in both muscle development and muscle satellite cell-dependent
repair. Here, we show that the homeodomain factor Barx2 is a new marker for
embryonic and adult myoblasts and is required for normal postnatal muscle growth 
and repair. Barx2 is coexpressed with Pax7, which is the canonical marker of
satellite cells, and is upregulated in satellite cells after muscle injury. Mice 
lacking the Barx2 gene show reduced postnatal muscle growth, muscle atrophy, and 
defective muscle repair. Moreover, loss of Barx2 delays the expression of genes
that control proliferation and differentiation in regenerating muscle. Consistent
with the in vivo observations, satellite cell-derived myoblasts cultured from
Barx2(-/-) mice show decreased proliferation and ability to differentiate
relative to those from wild-type or Barx2(+/-) mice. Barx2(-/-) myoblasts show
reduced expression of the differentiation-associated factor myogenin as well as
cell adhesion and matrix molecules. Finally, we find that mice lacking both Barx2
and dystrophin gene expression have severe early onset myopathy. Together, these 
data indicate that Barx2 is an important regulator of muscle growth and repair
that acts via the control of satellite cell proliferation and differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4547831
PMID: 22076929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Development. 2011 Aug;138(15):3307-17. doi: 10.1242/dev.066241.

Barx2 and Fgf10 regulate ocular glands branching morphogenesis by controlling
extracellular matrix remodeling.

Tsau C(1), Ito M, Gromova A, Hoffman MP, Meech R, Makarenkova HP.

Author information: 
(1)The Neurosciences Institute, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

The lacrimal gland (LG) develops through branching morphogenesis and produces
secretions, including tears, that lubricate and protect the ocular surface.
Despite the prevalence of LG disorders such as dry eye, relatively little is
known about the regulation of LG development. In this study, we show that the
homeobox transcription factor Barx2 is highly expressed in conjunctival
epithelium, eyelids and ocular [lacrimal, harderian (HG), and meibomian (MG)]
glands and is necessary for normal ocular gland and eyelid development.
Barx2(-/-) mice show defective LG morphogenesis, absence of the HG, and defects
in MG and eyelid fusion. Ex vivo antisense assays confirm the requirement for
Barx2 in LG bud elongation and branching. Gene expression profiles reveal
decreased expression of several adhesion and matrix remodeling molecules in
Barx2(-/-) LGs. In culture, Barx2 regulates expression of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) and epithelial cell migration through the extracellular
matrix. Fibroblast growth factors are crucial regulators of LG development and we
show that Barx2 is required for Fgf10-induced LG bud elongation and that both
Barx2 and Fgf10 cooperate in the regulation of MMPs. Together, these data suggest
a mechanism for the effects of loss of Barx2 on ocular gland development.
Intriguingly, salivary glands that also express a high level of Barx2 develop
normally in Barx2(-/-) mice and do not show altered levels of MMPs. Thus, the
function of Barx2 is specific to ocular gland development. Based on our data, we 
propose a functional network involving Barx2, Fgf10 and MMPs that plays an
essential role in regulating branching morphogenesis of the ocular glands.

PMCID: PMC3133920
PMID: 21750040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 15;5(7):e11612. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011612.

The homeobox transcription factor Barx2 regulates plasticity of young primary
myofibers.

Meech R(1), Gomez M, Woolley C, Barro M, Hulin JA, Walcott EC, Delgado J,
Makarenkova HP.

Author information: 
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: Adult mammalian muscle retains incredible plasticity. Muscle growth
and repair involves the activation of undifferentiated myogenic precursors called
satellite cells. In some circumstances, it has been proposed that existing
myofibers may also cleave and produce a pool of proliferative cells that can
re-differentiate into new fibers. Such myofiber dedifferentiation has been
observed in the salamander blastema where it may occur in parallel with satellite
cell activation. Moreover, ectopic expression of the homeodomain transcription
factor Msx1 in differentiated C2C12 myotubes has been shown to induce their
dedifferentiation. While it remains unclear whether dedifferentiation and
redifferentiaton occurs endogenously in mammalian muscle, there is considerable
interest in induced dedifferentiation as a possible regenerative tool.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We previously showed that the homeobox protein
Barx2 promotes myoblast differentiation. Here we report that ectopic expression
of Barx2 in young immature myotubes derived from cell lines and primary mouse
myoblasts, caused cleavage of the syncytium and downregulation of differentiation
markers. Microinjection of Barx2 cDNA into immature myotubes derived from primary
cells led to cleavage and formation of mononucleated cells that were able to
proliferate. However, injection of Barx2 cDNA into mature myotubes did not cause 
cleavage. Barx2 expression in C2C12 myotubes increased the expression of cyclin
D1, which may promote cell cycle re-entry. We also observed differential muscle
gene regulation by Barx2 at early and late stages of muscle differentiation which
may be due to differential recruitment of transcriptional activator or repressor 
complexes to muscle specific genes by Barx2.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We show that Barx2 regulates plasticity of immature
myofibers and might act as a molecular switch controlling cell differentiation
and proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2904708
PMID: 20657655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Acta Histochem Cytochem. 2009 Apr 28;42(2):47-53. doi: 10.1267/ahc.08027. Epub
2009 Mar 31.

Immunohistochemical localization of barx2 in the developing fetal mouse
submandibular glands.

Naka T(1), Yokose S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Restorative Dentistry, Department of Conservative Dentistry, Ohu
University School of Dentistry, 31-1, Misumido, Koriyama, Fukushima 963-8611,
Japan.

The development of mouse submandibular gland (SMG) begins at embryonic day
11.5-12 (E11.5-12), during which successive rounds of epithelial clefting and
branching create complex epithelial tree-like structures. Homeobox genes regulate
place-dependent morphogenesis, including epithelial-mesenchymal interactions, and
control the expression patterns of signaling molecules. The Barx2 containing
Homeobox exerts several key roles in development. Some studies have shown that
the Barx2 plays important roles in the epithelial-mesenchymal interactions of
organogenesis. However, the mechanisms of Barx2 associated with the development
of SMG are obscure. In this study, we demonstrated for the first time the exact
spatial and temporal Barx2 expression pattern in SMG epithelial tissue during
development using immunohistochemical staining and Real-Time quantitative PCR.
Barx2 was expressed in the nucleus of the epithelial cells located in the
proliferative and differentiative regions of the developing SMG during the early 
development stages (E11.5-E13.5). After the E14.5-time period, the expression
gradually decreased, and at E16.5, expression mostly disappeared despite the fact
that evidence of cytodifferentiation, such as the appearance of proacinar cells, 
distinct lumen formation, and secretory products, was beginning to be observed.
Results of Real-Time PCR demonstrated that the amount of Barx2 mRNA expression in
SMG was maximal on E14.5, and gradually decreased by E18.5. These results
indicate that Barx2 is associated with early stage epithelial tissue development,
and can be a useful epithelial marker of the SMG during early developmental
stages.

PMCID: PMC2685023
PMID: 19492027  [PubMed]


11. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 29;284(22):14866-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807208200. Epub 2009
Mar 5.

Barx2 controls myoblast fusion and promotes MyoD-mediated activation of the
smooth muscle alpha-actin gene.

Makarenkova HP(1), Gonzalez KN, Kiosses WB, Meech R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Core Microscopy Facility, Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton is a critical early step in skeletal muscle 
differentiation. Smooth muscle alpha-actin (SMA) is one of the earliest markers
of myoblast differentiation and is important for the migration and cell shape
changes that precede fusion. We have found that satellite cell-derived primary
myoblasts from mice lacking the Barx2 homeobox gene show altered patterns of
actin remodeling, reduced cell migration, and delayed differentiation. Consistent
with the role of SMA in these processes, Barx2(-)(/)(-) myoblasts also show
reduced expression of SMA mRNA and protein. The proximal SMA promoter contains
binding sites for muscle regulatory factors and serum response factor as well as 
a conserved homeodomain binding site (HBS). We found that Barx2 binds to the HBS 
element and potentiates up-regulation of SMA promoter activity by MyoD. We also
show that Barx2, MyoD, and serum response factor simultaneously occupy the SMA
promoter in cells and that Barx2 interacts with MyoD. Overall these data indicate
that Barx2 cooperates with other muscle-expressed transcription factors to
regulate the early cytoskeletal remodeling events that underlie efficient
myoblast differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2685668
PMID: 19269978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Dev Biol. 2008 Sep 1;321(1):101-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.06.004. Epub 2008
Jun 13.

barx1 is necessary for ectomesenchyme proliferation and osteochondroprogenitor
condensation in the zebrafish pharyngeal arches.

Sperber SM(1), Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
sperbers@mail.nih.gov

Barx1 modulates cellular adhesion molecule expression and participates in
specification of tooth-types, but little is understood of its role in patterning 
the pharyngeal arches. We examined barx1 expression during zebrafish craniofacial
development and performed a functional analysis using antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides. Barx1 is expressed in the rhombencephalic neural crest, the
pharyngeal arches, the pectoral fin buds and the gut in contrast to its paralogue
barx2, which is most prominently expressed in the arch epithelium. Additionally, 
barx1 transient expression was observed in the posterior lateral line ganglia and
developing trunk/tail. We show that Barx1 is necessary for proliferation of the
arch osteochondrogenic progenitors, and that morphants exhibit diminished and
dysmorphic arch cartilage elements due to reductions in chondrocyte
differentiation and condensation. Attenuation of Barx1 results in lost arch
expression of osteochondrogenic markers col2a1, runx2a and chondromodulin, as
well as odontogenic marker dlx2b. Further, loss of barx1 positively influenced
gdf5 and chordin, markers of jaw joint patterning. FGF signaling is required for 
maintaining barx1 expression, and that ectopic BMP4 induces expression of barx1
in the intermediate region of the second pharyngeal arch. Together, these results
indicate an essential role for barx1 at early stages of chondrogenesis within the
developing zebrafish viscerocranium.

PMCID: PMC2669285
PMID: 18590717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Bioessays. 2007 Aug;29(8):725-37.

Deconstructing digit chondrogenesis.

Montero JA(1), Hurlé JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular, Universidad de Cantabria, 39011
Santander, Spain.

Chondrogenesis is a key process in skeletogenesis since endochondral ossification
requires the formation of a cartilaginous template. Knowledge of molecular
mechanisms regulating chondrogenesis is extremely valuable not only to understand
many human disorders but also in regenerative medicine. Embryonic skeletogenesis 
is an excellent model to study this mechanism. Most cartilages share the cellular
basis underlying chondrogenesis but the high heterogeneity in morphologies of the
different skeletal elements appears to be generated by differential participation
of a variety of chondrogenic signals. Here we overview the regulatory factors
responsible for chondrogenesis concluding that early chondrogenic signals for the
digit cartilages differ from those implicated in the formation of other axial and
appendicular skeletal components.

(c) 2007 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 17621635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Oncogene. 2006 Aug 31;25(39):5426-35. Epub 2006 Apr 24.

BARX2 and estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) coordinately regulate the production of 
alternatively spliced ESR1 isoforms and control breast cancer cell growth and
invasion.

Stevens TA(1), Meech R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

The estrogen receptor-alpha gene (ESR1) was previously identified as a direct
target of the homeobox transcription factor BARX2 in MCF7 cells. Here, we show
that BARX2 and ESR1 proteins bind to different ESR1 gene promoters and regulate
the expression of alternatively spliced mRNAs that encode 66 and 46 kDa ESR1
protein isoforms. BARX2 increases the expression of both ESR1 isoforms; however, 
it has a greater effect on the 46 kDa isoform, leading to an increased ratio
between the 46 and 66 kDa proteins. BARX2 also influences estrogen-dependent
processes such as anchorage-independent growth and modulates the expression of
the estrogen-responsive genes SOX5, RBM15, Dynein and Mortalin. In addition,
BARX2 expression promotes cellular invasion and increases the expression of
active matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9). BARX2 also increases the expression of 
the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) genes, TIMP1 and TIMP3, in
cooperation with estrogen signaling. Overall, these data indicate that BARX2 and 
ESR1 may coordinately regulate cell growth, survival and invasion pathways that
are critical to breast cancer progression.

PMID: 16636675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Development. 2005 May;132(9):2135-46. Epub 2005 Mar 30.

The homeobox transcription factor Barx2 regulates chondrogenesis during limb
development.

Meech R(1), Edelman DB, Jones FS, Makarenkova HP.

Author information: 
(1)The Neurosciences Institute 10640 John Jay Hopkins Drive, San Diego, CA 92121,
USA.

Among the many factors involved in regulation of chondrogenesis, bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and members of the Sox and homeobox transcription
factor families have been shown to have crucial roles. Of these regulators, the
homeobox transcription factors that function during chondrogenesis have been the 
least well defined. We show here that the homeobox transcription factor Barx2 is 
expressed in primary mesenchymal condensations, digital rays, developing joints
and articular cartilage of the developing limb, suggesting that it plays a role
in chondrogenesis. Using retroviruses and antisense oligonucleotides to
manipulate Barx2 expression in limb bud micromass cultures, we determined that
Barx2 is necessary for mesenchymal aggregation and chondrogenic differentiation. 
In accordance with these findings, Barx2 regulates the expression of several
genes encoding cell-adhesion molecules and extracellular matrix proteins,
including NCAM and collagen II (Col2a1) in the limb bud. Barx2 bound to elements 
within the cartilage-specific Col2a1 enhancer, and this binding was reduced by
addition of Barx2 or Sox9 antibodies, or by mutation of a HMG box adjacent to the
Barx2-binding element, suggesting cooperation between Barx2 and Sox proteins.
Moreover, both Barx2 and Sox9 occupy Col2a1 enhancer during chondrogenesis in
vivo. We also found that two members of the BMP family that are crucial for
chondrogenesis, GDF5 and BMP4, regulate the pattern of Barx2 expression in
developing limbs. Based on these data, we suggest that Barx2 acts downstream of
BMP signaling and in concert with Sox proteins to regulate chondrogenesis.

PMID: 15800003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Mar 8;102(10):3708-13. Epub 2005 Feb 22.

Barx2 functions through distinct corepressor classes to regulate hair follicle
remodeling.

Olson LE(1), Zhang J, Taylor H, Rose DW, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program,
University of California at San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA
92093-0648, USA.

The hair-growth cycle, a complex biological system requiring coordinate
alterations in gene expression and cellular behavior, provides a challenging
model for investigating the interplay of specific transcriptional regulation
events. Here we report that the Barx2 homeodomain factor serves as a regulator of
hair follicle remodeling (catagen), and loss of Barx2 in mice causes a defect
both in the initiation and progression of catagen, resulting in a protracted
first catagen, and later, causing short hair in adult gene-deleted mice. Barx2
negatively regulates its own promoter, and our study highlights the role of Barx2
as a repressor in the skin that can, unexpectedly, functionally interact with two
WD40-domain factors distantly related to the yeast corepressor Tup1. These two
corepressors, transducin-like enhancer of split and transducin beta-like 1,
function through distinct and independent interactions with Barx2 for the
repression of gene targets, including the Barx2 gene itself, emphasizing the
roles of complementary repression strategies in engrailed homology-1
motif-containing homeodomain factors. Together, our data suggest that the
hair-remodeling defect of Barx2 mutant mice could be explained, in part, by
failure to repress one or more critical target genes.

PMCID: PMC553323
PMID: 15728386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Histochem Cytochem. 2004 Apr;52(4):541-4.

Expression of the homeobox gene barx2 in the gut.

Sander GR(1), Powell BC.

Author information: 
(1)Child Health Research Institute, Womens and Childrens Hospital, North
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. guy.sander@adelaide.edu.au

Barx2 is a member of the Bar class of homeobox genes and has been shown to
regulate specific cell adhesion molecules, L1, Ng-CAM, N-CAM, and cadherin 6. By 
Northern blotting and in situ hybridization, we show that Barx2 is expressed
throughout the gut and is located in epithelial cells of the proliferative and
differentiative regions of the stomach, esophagus, and intestine. Barx2 was
expressed in muscle cells of the muscularis externa and also showed a graded
pattern of expression in intestinal enterocytes, decreasing in a crypt-to-villous
direction. We speculate that Barx2 may regulate cell adhesion molecules in
epithelial cells of the gut.

PMID: 15034005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 9;279(15):14520-30. Epub 2004 Jan 26.

Identification of novel binding elements and gene targets for the homeodomain
protein BARX2.

Stevens TA(1), Iacovoni JS, Edelman DB, Meech R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

BARX2 is a homeobox transcription factor that influences cellular differentiation
in various developmental contexts. To begin to identify the gene targets that
mediate its effects, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was used to isolate
BARX2 binding sites from the human MCF7 breast cancer cell line. Cloning and
sequencing of BARX2-ChIP-derived DNA fragments identified 60 potential BARX2
target loci that were proximal to or within introns of genes involved in
cytoskeletal organization, cell adhesion, growth factor signaling,
transcriptional regulation, and RNA metabolism. The sequences of over half of the
fragments showed homology with the mouse genome, and several sequences could be
mapped to orthologous human and mouse genes. Binding of BARX2 to 21 genomic loci 
examined was confirmed quantitatively by replicate ChIP assays. A combination of 
sequence analysis and electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed homeodomain 
binding sites within several fragments that bind to BARX2 in vitro. The majority 
of BARX2 binding fragments tested (14/19), also affected transcription in
luciferase reporter gene assays. Mutation analyses of three fragments showed that
their transcriptional activities required the HBS, and suggested that BARX2
regulates gene expression by binding to DNA elements containing paired TAAT
motifs that are separated by a poly(T) sequence. Inhibition of BARX2 expression
in MCF7 cells led to reduced expression of eight genes associated with BARX2
binding sites, indicating that BARX2 directly regulates their expression. The
data suggest that BARX2 can coordinate the expression of a network of genes that 
influence the growth of MCF7 cells.

PMID: 14744868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 7;278(10):8269-78. Epub 2002 Dec 16.

The homeodomain protein Barx2 promotes myogenic differentiation and is regulated 
by myogenic regulatory factors.

Meech R(1), Makarenkova H, Edelman DB, Jones FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA. rmeech@scripps.edu

The homeobox protein Barx2 is expressed in both smooth and skeletal muscle and is
up-regulated during differentiation of skeletal myotubes. Here we use
antisense-oligonucleotide inhibition of Barx2 expression in limb bud cell culture
to show that Barx2 is required for myotube formation. Moreover, overexpression of
Barx2 accelerates the fusion of MyoD-positive limb bud cells and C2C12 myoblasts.
However, overexpression of Barx2 does not induce ectopic MyoD expression in
either limb bud cultures or in multipotent C3H10T1/2 mesenchymal cells, and does 
not induce fusion of C3H10T1/2 cells. These results suggest that Barx2 acts
downstream of MyoD. To test this hypothesis, we isolated the Barx2 gene promoter 
and identified DNA regulatory elements that might control Barx2 expression during
myogenesis. The proximal promoter of the Barx2 gene contained binding sites for
several factors involved in myoblast differentiation including MyoD, myogenin,
serum response factor, and myocyte enhancer factor 2. Co-transfection experiments
showed that binding sites for both MyoD and serum response factor are necessary
for activation of the promoter by MyoD and myogenin. Taken together, these
studies indicate that Barx2 is a key regulator of myogenic differentiation that
acts downstream of muscle regulatory factors.

PMID: 12486129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Int J Oncol. 2002 Nov;21(5):929-33.

The homeobox gene BARX2 can modulate cisplatin sensitivity in human epithelial
ovarian cancer.

Sellar GC(1), Watt KP, Li L, Nelkin BD, Rabiasz GJ, Porteous DJ, Smyth JF, Gabra 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Edinburgh Oncology Unit and University of Edinburgh
Department of Clinical Oncology, Western General Hospital, Crewe Road South,
Edinburgh EH4 2XR, Scotland, UK.

Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the most common cause of death from
gynaecological malignancy. Resistance to platinum chemotherapy is a major reason 
for treatment failure and poor prognosis. The human homeobox gene BARX2 is
located within a minimal region at 11q25 that is associated with frequent loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) and adverse survival in EOC. BARX2 is a transcription factor
known to regulate transcription of specific cell adhesion molecules in the mouse.
We have previously shown that BARX2 expression is low in clear cell/endometrioid 
and high in serous adenocarcinomas of the ovary, histologic variants that are
less and more sensitive, respectively to platinum chemotherapy. The aim of this
study was to define whether BARX2 could modulate sensitivity to cisplatin in
human epithelial ovarian cancer. In two cell line series sequentially derived
from ovarian cancer patients pre- and post-cisplatin chemotherapy, BARX2
expression was downregulated in the cell lines established upon tumor recurrence 
after platinum therapy. Transfection of BARX2 into a platinum resistant cell line
significantly reversed cisplatin resistance compared with its isogenic platinum
sensitive parent, in both growth inhibition and clonogenic assays. Taken
together, our data demonstrate that the homeobox gene BARX2 may be a biological
factor involved in determining sensitivity or resistance to the cytotoxic effects
of cisplatin.

PMID: 12370737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cancer Res. 2001 Oct 1;61(19):6977-81.

BARX2 induces cadherin 6 expression and is a functional suppressor of ovarian
cancer progression.

Sellar GC(1), Li L, Watt KP, Nelkin BD, Rabiasz GJ, Stronach EA, Miller EP,
Porteous DJ, Smyth JF, Gabra H.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund Medical Oncology Unit and University of
Edinburgh Department of Clinical Oncology, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, United Kingdom.

The human homeobox BARX2 is located at 11q24-q25, within a minimal region
associated with frequent loss of heterozygosity and adverse survival in
epithelial ovarian cancer. BARX2 is a transcription factor that regulates
transcription of specific cell adhesion molecules in the mouse. We show that
BARX2 and cadherin 6 are expressed in normal human ovarian surface epithelium.
BARX2 and cadherin 6 both have significantly lower expression in a clinical
sample of endometrioid and clear cell ovarian cancers, as compared with serous or
mixed mesodermal tumors. In a series of ovarian cancer cell lines, BARX2
expression showed a significant direct correlation with cadherin 6 expression. In
OAW42, an ovarian cancer cell line that does not endogenously express BARX2, in
vitro transfection of human BARX2 cDNA induced cadherin 6 expression.
Transfection of BARX2 into OAW42 inhibited Matrigel invasion, haptotactic
cellular migration to a collagen IV signal, and adhesion to collagen IV-coated
plates. Our data demonstrate that BARX2 is expressed in the ovarian surface
epithelium and has functional suppressor properties in ovarian cancer cells.

PMID: 11585719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 27;276(17):14482-9. Epub 2001 Jan 29.

Identification of Barx2b, a serum response factor-associated homeodomain protein.

Herring BP(1), Kriegel AM, Hoggatt AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana University School
of Medicine, Indianapolis 46202-5120, USA. pherring@iupui.edu

CC(A/T)(6)GG or serum response elements represent a common regulatory motif
important for regulating the expression of many smooth muscle-specific genes.
They are multifunctional elements that bind serum response factor (SRF) and are
important for serum induction of genes, expression of muscle-specific genes, and 
differentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells. In the current study, a yeast
two-hybrid screen was used to identify proteins from mouse intestine that
interact with SRF. A novel homeodomain-containing transcription factor, called
Barx2b, was identified that specifically interacts with SRF and promotes the DNA 
binding activity of SRF. Northern blotting, RNase protection analysis, and
Western blotting revealed that Barx2b mRNA and protein are expressed in several
smooth muscle-containing tissues, as well as in skeletal muscle and brain. In
vitro binding studies using bacterial fusion proteins revealed that the
DNA-binding domain of SRF interacts with a region of Barx2b located
amino-terminal of the homeobox domain. The results of these studies support the
hypothesis that interaction of SRF with different homeodomain-containing proteins
may play a critical role in determining the cell-specific functions of SRF.

PMID: 11278942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Invest Dermatol. 2000 Oct;115(4):753-6.

Expression of the homeobox gene, Barx2, in wool follicle development.

Sander G(1), Bawden CS, Hynd PI, Nesci A, Rogers G, Powell BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Adelaide, Waite Campus, Glen
Osmond, South Australia.

We have cloned ovine Barx2, a member of the Bar class of homeobox genes, and
present the first description of Barx2 expression in wool follicle development.
Barx2 is uniformly expressed in the embryonic ectoderm but is transiently
downregulated during the initiation of follicle morphogenesis. Subsequently,
Barx2 is expressed throughout the epithelial component of the developing follicle
except for a small group of cells at the leading edge of the follicle placode.
These Barx2-negative cells are destined to form the follicle bulb and are the
progenitors of the inner root sheath and hair shaft. In adult follicles, Barx2 is
expressed throughout the outer root sheath but not in the inner root sheath or
hair shaft, or in dermal cells associated with the follicle. The pattern of Barx2
expression in follicle morphogenesis is similar to that of the cell adhesion
molecule E-cadherin, a similarity that echoes Barx2 coexpression with the L1 cell
adhesion molecule in other tissues during mouse embryogenesis. Barx2 is also
expressed in tongue and esophagus, two other keratinizing tissues, and we
speculate that Barx2 may have a general function in controlling adhesive
processes in keratinizing epithelia.

PMID: 10998155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Gene. 2000 May 30;250(1-2):171-80.

Cloning and chromosomal localization of the human BARX2 homeobox protein gene.

Krasner A(1), Wallace L, Thiagalingam A, Jones C, Lengauer C, Minahan L, Ma Y,
Kalikin L, Feinberg AP, Jabs EW, Tunnacliffe A, Baylin SB, Ball DW, Nelkin BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, John Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21231, USA.

The human BARX2 gene encodes a homeodomain-containing protein of 254 amino acids,
which binds optimally to the DNA consensus sequence YYTAATGRTTTTY. BARX2 is
highly expressed in adult salivary gland and is expressed at lower levels in
other tissues, including mammary gland, kidney, and placenta. The BARX2 gene
consists of four exons, and is located on human chromosome 11q25. This
chromosomal location is within the minimal deletion region for Jacobsen syndrome,
a syndrome including craniosynostosis and other developmental abnormalities. This
chromosomal location, along with the reported expression of murine barx2 in
craniofacial development, suggests that BARX2 may be causally involved in the
craniofacial abnormalities in Jacobsen syndrome.

PMID: 10854790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jul 14;275(28):21737-45.

The homeodomain protein Barx2 contains activator and repressor domains and
interacts with members of the CREB family.

Edelman DB(1), Meech R, Jones FS.

Author information: 
(1)Neurosciences Institute, San Diego, California 92121 and the Department of
Neurobiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Barx1 and Barx2 are homeodomain proteins originally identified using regulatory
elements of genes encoding certain cell adhesion molecules (CAMs). In the present
study, we characterize regions of Barx2 that bind to regulatory elements of genes
encoding three CAMs, L1, neuron-glia CAM (Ng-CAM), and neural CAM (N-CAM), and
identify domains of Barx2 that regulate N-CAM transcription. The homeodomain of
Barx2 was sufficient for binding to homeodomain binding sites (HBS) from all
three CAM genes. The presence of a 17-amino acid Barx basic region resulted in a 
2-fold decrease in binding to HBS sequences from the Ng-CAM and L1 genes, whereas
it led to a 6.5-fold increase in binding to the HBS from the N-CAM promoter.
Thus, the Barx basic region influences the strength and specificity of Barx2
binding to DNA. In co-transfection experiments, Barx2 repressed N-CAM promoter
activity. A 24-residue N-terminal region of Barx2 was essential for repression.
When this region was absent, Barx2 activated the N-CAM promoter. A 63-residue
C-terminal domain was required for this activation. In GST pull-down experiments,
Barx2 bound to proteins of the CREB family, CREB1 and ATF2. Overall, these
findings provide a framework for understanding developmental and physiological
contexts that influence repressor or activator functions of Barx2.

PMID: 10781615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Genomics. 1999 Dec 15;62(3):456-9.

The human BARX2 gene: genomic structure, chromosomal localization, and single
nucleotide polymorphisms.

Hjalt TA(1), Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, 140 EMRB, Iowa City, Iowa 52242,
USA.

The BARX genes 1 and 2 are Bar class homeobox genes expressed in craniofacial
structures during development. In this report, we present the genomic structure, 
chromosomal localization, and polymorphic markers in BARX2. The gene has four
exons, ranging in size from 85 to 1099 bp. BARX2 is localized on human chromosome
11q25, as determined by radiation hybrid mapping. In the mouse, Barx2 is
coexpressed with Pitx2 in several tissues. Based on the coexpression, BARX2 was
assumed to be a candidate gene for those cases of Rieger syndrome that cannot be 
associated with mutations of PITX2. Mutations in PITX2 cause some cases of Rieger
syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder affecting eyes, teeth, and umbilicus.
DNA from Rieger patients was subjected to single-strand conformation polymorphism
screening of the BARX2 coding region. Three single nucleotide polymorphisms were 
found in a normal population, although no etiologic mutations were detectable in 
over 100 cases of Rieger syndrome or in individuals with related ocular
disorders.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10644443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mech Dev. 1999 Feb;80(2):203-6.

Chick Barx2b, a marker for myogenic cells also expressed in branchial arches and 
neural structures.

Smith DM(1), Tabin CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston,
MA 02115, USA.

We have isolated a new chicken gene, cBarx2b, which is related to mBarx2 in
sequence, although the expression patterns of the two genes are quite different
from one another. The cBarx2b gene is expressed in craniofacial structures,
regions of the neural tube, and muscle groups in the limb, neck and cloaca.
Perturbation of anterior muscle pattern by application of Sonic Hedgehog protein 
results in a posteriorization of cBarx2b expression.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 10072789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Mar 2;96(5):2420-5.

A binding site for homeodomain and Pax proteins is necessary for L1 cell adhesion
molecule gene expression by Pax-6 and bone morphogenetic proteins.

Meech R(1), Kallunki P, Edelman GM, Jones FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, The Scripps Research Institute and the Skaggs
Institute for Chemical Biology, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

The cell adhesion molecule L1 regulates axonal guidance and fasciculation during 
development. We previously identified the regulatory region of the L1 gene and
showed that it was sufficient for establishing the neural pattern of L1
expression in transgenic mice. In the present study, we characterize a DNA
element within this region called the HPD that contains binding motifs for both
homeodomain and Pax proteins and responds to signals from bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMPs). An ATTA sequence within the core of the HPD was required for
binding to the homeodomain protein Barx2 while a separate paired domain
recognition motif was necessary for binding to Pax-6. In cellular transfection
experiments, L1-luciferase reporter constructs containing the HPD were activated 
an average of 4-fold by Pax-6 in N2A cells and 5-fold by BMP-2 and BMP-4 in Ng108
cells. Both of these responses were eliminated on deletion of the HPD from L1
constructs. In transgenic mice, deletion of the HPD from an L1-lacZ reporter
resulted in a loss of beta-galactosidase expression in the telencephalon and
mesencephalon. Collectively, our experiments indicate that the HPD regulates L1
expression in neural tissues via homeodomain and Pax proteins and is likely to be
a target of BMP signaling during development.

PMCID: PMC26799
PMID: 10051657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Mar 18;94(6):2632-7.

Barx2, a new homeobox gene of the Bar class, is expressed in neural and
craniofacial structures during development.

Jones FS(1), Kioussi C, Copertino DW, Kallunki P, Holst BD, Edelman GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

Homeobox genes are regulators of place-dependent morphogenesis and play important
roles in controlling the expression patterns of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs).
To identify proteins that bind to a regulatory element common to the genes for
two neural CAMs, Ng-CAM and L1, we screened a mouse cDNA expression library with 
a concatamer of the sequence CCATTAGPyGA and found a new homeobox gene, which we 
have called Barx2. The homeodomain encoded by Barx2 is 87% identical to that of
Barx1, and both genes are related to genes at the Bar locus of Drosophila
melanogaster. Barx1 and Barx2 also encode an identical stretch of 17 residues
downstream of the homeobox; otherwise, they share no appreciable homology. In
vitro, Barx2 stimulated activity of an L1 promoter construct containing the
CCATTAGPyGA motif but repressed activity when this sequence was deleted.
Localization studies showed that expression of Barx1 and Barx2 overlap in the
nervous system, particularly in the telencephalon, spinal cord, and dorsal root
ganglia. Barx2 was also prominently expressed in the floor plate and in Rathke's 
pouch. During craniofacial development, Barx1 and Barx2 showed complementary
patterns of expression: whereas Barx1 appeared in the mesenchyme of the
mandibular and maxillary processes, Barx2 was observed in the ectodermal lining
of these tissues. Intense expression of Barx2 was observed in small groups of
cells undergoing tissue remodeling, such as ectodermal cells within indentations 
surrounding the eye and maxillo-nasal groove and in the first branchial pouch,
lung buds, precartilagenous condensations, and mesenchyme of the limb. The
localization data, combined with Barx2's dual function as activator and
repressor, suggest that Barx2 may differentially control the expression of L1 and
other target genes during embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC20140
PMID: 9122247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


