
1. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb 16. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.4896. [Epub ahead of print]

Forkhead box O1 promotes INS-1 cell apoptosis by reducing the expression of CD24.

Ma Y(1), Wang X(1), Peng Y(1), Ding X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai First People's Hospital, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200080, P.R. China.

Type 2 diabetes seriously affects human health and burdens public health systems.
Pancreatic ß-cell apoptosis contributes to a reduction in ß-cell mass, which is
responsible for the occurrence of type 2 diabetes. However, the mechanism that
underlies this effect remains unclear. In the present study, the role of forkhead
box O1 (Foxo1) was investigated (which is a key regulatory factor in ß-cell
function) in the apoptotic behavior of ß-cells and a potential underlying
mechanism was determined. It was demonstrated that Foxo1 overexpression
significantly reduced the proliferation of INS-1 cells and increased the
apoptosis of INS-1 cells, in contrast to foxm1, foxp, foxa1, foxc and foxb1
overexpression. The present study aimed to investigate potential underlying
mechanisms using bioinformatics, including Gene Set Enrichment Analysis, and
biological experiments, including flow cytometry, cell counting kit-8,
immunofluorescence, western blotting, reverse transcription-quantitative
polymerase chain reaction analysis and lentiviral transfection. Further
experiments conclusively showed that cluster of differentiation (CD)24 expression
was significantly decreased when INS-1 cells were treated with Foxo1. Animal
experiments showed high CD24 expression in the pancreatic islets of diabetic
Goto-Kakizaki rats. Moreover, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis showed that CD24
expression was associated with the adaptive immune response of ß-cells. Finally, 
no significant differences in the proliferation and apoptosis of CD24
overexpressing INS-1 cells were observed after Foxo1 treatment. These results
suggested that Foxo1 overexpression in ß-cells was able to increase apoptosis by 
inhibiting CD24 expression. This study may provide an approach for the treatment 
and prevention of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 26935354  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Brain Res. 2016 Feb 15;1633:111-4. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2015.12.054. Epub 2016
Jan 4.

Birthdate of parvalbumin-neurons in the Parvafox-nucleus of the lateral
hypothalamus.

Bilella A(1), Alvarez-Bolado G(2), Celio MR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Anatomy Unit, Department of Medicine and Program in Neuroscience, University
of Fribourg, CH-1700 Fribourg, Switzerland. (2)Institute of Anatomy and Cell
Biology, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 307, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany. (3)Anatomy Unit, Department of Medicine and Program in Neuroscience,
University of Fribourg, CH-1700 Fribourg, Switzerland. Electronic address:
marco.celio@unifr.ch.

The Parvafox-nucleus in the lateral hypothalamus is characterized by the presence
of two distinct neural populations, the Parvalbumin (Parv) and the
Foxb1-expressing ones. Foxb1-neurons are born at day 10 in the subventricular
zone of the mouse mammillary region. It would be interesting to know if the
subpopulation of Parv- neurons develop independently at different times and then 
meet the Foxb1- expressing neurons in the lateral hypothalamus, their final
settling place. The aim of this study was to define the period of birth of the
Parv-positive neurons using an in-vivo Bromodeoxyuridine-based method in rats.
Parv-neurons are generated from embryonic day 10 to day 13, with a peak at day
12. Thus, it appears that the birthdates of the two subpopulations in these two
species is similar, perhaps suggesting that they are born from the same
neuroepithelial region.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26764531  [PubMed - in process]


3. BMC Genet. 2015 Dec 3;16:141. doi: 10.1186/s12863-015-0296-7.

A genome-wide association study of asthma symptoms in Latin American children.

Costa GN(1), Dudbridge F(2), Fiaccone RL(3), da Silva TM(4), Conceição JS(5),
Strina A(6), Figueiredo CA(7), Magalhães WC(8), Rodrigues MR(9), Gouveia MH(10), 
Kehdy FS(11), Horimoto AR(12), Horta B(13), Burchard EG(14), Pino-Yanes M(15),
Del Rio Navarro B(16), Romieu I(17), Hancock DB(18), London S(19), Lima-Costa
MF(20), Pereira AC(21), Tarazona E(22), Rodrigues LC(23), Barreto ML(24,)(25).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Saúde Coletiva, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil. 
gustavokosta@gmail.com. (2)Department of Non-communicable Disease Epidemiology,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
frank.dudbridge@lshtm.ac.uk. (3)Instituto de Matemática, Universidade Federal da 
Bahia, Salvador, Brazil. rose.fiaccone@gmail.com. (4)Instituto de Saúde Coletiva,
Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil. thiago@uesb.edu.br. (5)Instituto
de Matemática, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil.
jsantos1013@gmail.com. (6)Instituto de Saúde Coletiva, Universidade Federal da
Bahia, Salvador, Brazil. agstrina@yahoo.com.br. (7)Instituto de Ciências da
Saúde, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil. cavfigueiredo@gmail.com. 
(8)Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, Brazil. wcsmagalhaes@gmail.com. (9)Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
maira.r.rodrigues@gmail.com. (10)Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade
Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. mateushgbio@gmail.com.
(11)Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo 
Horizonte, Brazil. fsgkehdy@yahoo.com.br. (12)Instituto do Coração, Universidade 
de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. andreavrh@usp.br. (13)Programa de Pós Graduação 
em Epidemiologia, Universidade Federal de Pelotas, Pelotas, Brazil.
blhorta@gmail.com. (14)Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, USA. esteban.burchard@ucsf.edu. (15)Department of Medicine, University
of California, San Francisco, USA. mdelpino@ull.edu.es. (16)Department of Health 
and Human Services, Epidemiology Branch, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina, USA. blancadelrionavarro@gmail.com. (17)Instituto Nacional de Salud
Publica, Cuernavaca, Mexico. iromieu@gmail.com. (18)Behavioral and Urban Health
Program, Research Triangle Institute (RTI) International, Research Triangle Park,
North Carolina, USA. dhancock@rti.org. (19)Department of Health and Human
Services, Epidemiology Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, 
USA. london2@niehs.nih.gov. (20)Instituto de Pesquisas Rene Rachou, Fundação
Oswaldo Cruz, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. lima-costa@cpqrr.fiocruz.br. (21)Instituto 
de Pesquisas Rene Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
alexandre.pereira@incor.usp.br. (22)Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. edutars@gmail.com. 
(23)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London, UK. laura.Rodrigues@lshtm.ac.uk. (24)Instituto de
Saúde Coletiva, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil.
mauricio@ufba.br. (25)Centro de Pesquisa Gonçalo Muniz, Fundação Osvaldo Cruz,
Salvador, Brazil. mauricio@ufba.br.

BACKGROUND: Asthma is a chronic disease of the airways and, despite the advances 
in the knowledge of associated genetic regions in recent years, their mechanisms 
have yet to be explored. Several genome-wide association studies have been
carried out in recent years, but none of these have involved Latin American
populations with a high level of miscegenation, as is seen in the Brazilian
population.
METHODS: 1246 children were recruited from a longitudinal cohort study in
Salvador, Brazil. Asthma symptoms were identified in accordance with an
International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood (ISAAC) questionnaire.
Following quality control, 1,877,526 autosomal SNPs were tested for association
with childhood asthma symptoms by logistic regression using an additive genetic
model. We complemented the analysis with an estimate of the phenotypic variance
explained by common genetic variants. Replications were investigated in
independent Mexican and US Latino samples.
RESULTS: Two chromosomal regions reached genome-wide significance level for
childhood asthma symptoms: the 14q11 region flanking the DAD1 and OXA1L genes
(rs1999071, MAF 0.32, OR 1.78, 95% CI 1.45-2.18, p-value 2.83<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8)) and 15q22
region flanking the FOXB1 gene (rs10519031, MAF 0.04, OR 3.0, 95% CI 2.02-4.49,
p-value 6.68<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8) and rs8029377, MAF 0.03, OR 2.49, 95% CI 1.76-3.53, p-value
2.45<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-7)). eQTL analysis suggests that rs1999071 regulates the expression of
OXA1L gene. However, the original findings were not replicated in the Mexican or 
US Latino samples.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the 14q11 and 15q22 regions may be associated with 
asthma symptoms in childhood.

PMCID: PMC4669662
PMID: 26635092  [PubMed - in process]


4. Front Neuroanat. 2015 Oct 27;9:136. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00136. eCollection
2015.

LIM homeobox protein 5 (Lhx5) is essential for mamillary body development.

Miquelajáuregui A(1), Sandoval-Schaefer T(1), Martínez-Armenta M(2),
Pérez-Martínez L(2), Cárabez A(1), Zhao Y(3), Heide M(4), Alvarez-Bolado G(4),
Varela-Echavarría A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Neurobiología del Desarrollo y Neurofisiología, Instituto de
Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México Querétaro, Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio de Neuroinmunobiología, Departamento de Medicina Molecular y
Bioprocesos, Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México 
Cuernavaca, Mexico. (3)Program on Genomics of Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD, USA. (4)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
University of Heidelberg Heidelberg, Germany.

The mamillary body (MM) is a group of hypothalamic nuclei related to memory and
spatial navigation that interconnects hippocampal, thalamic, and tegmental
regions. Here we demonstrate that Lhx5, a LIM-HD domain transcription factor
expressed early in the developing posterior hypothalamus, is required for the
generation of the MM and its derived tracts. The MM markers Foxb1, Sim2, and Lhx1
are absent in Lhx5 knock-out mice from early embryonic stages, suggesting
abnormal specification of this region. This was supported by the absence of
Nkx2.1 and expansion of Shh in the prospective mamillary area. Interestingly, we 
also found an ectopic domain expressing Lhx2 and Lhx9 along the anterio-posterior
hypothalamic axis. Our results suggest that Lhx5 controls early aspects of
hypothalamic development by regulating gene expression and cellular specification
in the prospective MM.

PMCID: PMC4621302
PMID: 26578897  [PubMed]


5. Behav Brain Res. 2016 Feb 1;298(Pt B):167-80. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.11.004.
Epub 2015 Nov 7.

Reduction in 50-kHz call-numbers and suppression of tickling-associated positive 
affective behaviour after lesioning of the lateral hypothalamic parvafox nucleus 
in rats.

Roccaro-Waldmeyer DM(1), Babalian A(1), Müller A(1), Celio MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Anatomy and Programme in Neuroscience, Faculty of Science, University of
Fribourg, Rte A. Gockel 1, CH-1700 Fribourg, Switzerland. (2)Anatomy and
Programme in Neuroscience, Faculty of Science, University of Fribourg, Rte A.
Gockel 1, CH-1700 Fribourg, Switzerland. Electronic address:
marco.celio@unifr.ch.

The parvafox nucleus is located ventrolaterally in the lateral hypothalamic area 
(LHA). Its core and shell are composed of neurons expressing the calcium-binding 
protein parvalbumin (PV) and the transcription factor Foxb1, respectively. Given 
the known functions of the LHA and that the parvafox nucleus receives afferents
from the lateral orbitofrontal cortex and projects to the periaqueductal gray
matter, a functional role of this entity in the expression of positive emotions
has been postulated. The purpose of the present study was to ascertain whether
the deletion of neurons in the parvafox nucleus influenced the tickling-induced
50-kHz calls, which are thought to reflect positive affective states, in rats. To
this end, tickling of the animals (heterospecific play) was combined with
intracerebral injections of the excitotoxin kainic acid into the parvafox
nucleus. The most pronounced surgery-associated reduction in 50-kHz call-numbers 
was observed in the group of rats in which, on the basis of
PV-immunoreactive-cell counts in the parvafox nucleus, bilateral lesions had been
successfully produced. Two other parameters that were implemented to quantify
positive affective behaviour, namely, an approach towards and a following of the 
hand of the tickling experimenter, were likewise most markedly suppressed in the 
group of rats with bilaterally successful lesions. Furthermore, positive
correlations were found between each of the investigated parameters. Our data
afford evidence that the parvafox nucleus plays a role in the production of
50-kHz calls in rats, and, more generally, in the expression of positive
emotions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26554726  [PubMed - in process]


6. J Comp Neurol. 2016 Jun 1;524(8):1616-23. doi: 10.1002/cne.23853. Epub 2015 Aug
18.

The ventrolateral hypothalamic area and the parvafox nucleus: Role in the
expression of (positive) emotions?

Alvarez-Bolado G(1), Celio MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University 
of Heidelberg, D-69120, Germany. (2)Anatomy and Program in Neuroscience,
University of Fribourg, CH-1700, Fribourg, Switzerland.

The lateral hypothalamus has been long suspected of triggering the expression of 
positive emotions, because stimulations of its tuberal portion provoke bursts of 
laughter. Electrophysiological studies in various species have indeed confirmed
that the lateral hypothalamus contributes to reward mechanisms. However, only the
rudiments of the neural circuit underlying the expression of positive emotions
are known. The prefrontal cortex, the lateral hypothalamus, and the
periaqueductal gray matter (PAG) are involved in these circuits; so, too, are the
brainstem nuclei that control the laryngeal muscles and subserve mimicry, as well
as the cardiovascular and respiratory systems. The implicated populations of
hypothalamic neurons have not been defined either anatomically or molecularly.
One promising candidate is the novel parvafox nucleus, which we recently
described, in the murine medial forebrain bundle (mfb), which specifically
expresses parvalbumin and Foxb1. With the molecularly defined parvafox nucleus as
a centerpiece, the inputs from the prefrontal cortex and the projections to the
PAG and brainstem can be studied with precision. By drawing on genetic
approaches, it will be possible to manipulate the circuitry selectively with
spatial and temporal exactitude and to evaluate the concomitant autonomic
changes. These data will serve as a basis for imaging studies in humans using
various paradigms to provoke the expression of positive emotions. In conclusion, 
studies of the hypothalamic parvafox nucleus will reveal whether this entity
represents the fulcrum for positive emotions, as is the amygdala for fear and the
insula for disgust. J. Comp. Neurol. 524:1616-1623, 2016. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26179507  [PubMed - in process]


7. Front Neuroanat. 2015 Mar 19;9:29. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00029. eCollection
2015.

Cadherins mediate sequential roles through a hierarchy of mechanisms in the
developing mammillary body.

Szabó NE(1), Haddad-Tóvolli R(2), Zhou X(2), Alvarez-Bolado G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department Neurobiology and Development, Neural Circuit Development Unit, IRCM
Montréal, QC, Canada. (2)Department of Neuroanatomy, University of Heidelberg
Heidelberg, Germany.

Expression of intricate combinations of cadherins (a family of adhesive membrane 
proteins) is common in the developing central nervous system. On this basis, a
combinatorial cadherin code has long been proposed to underlie neuronal sorting
and to be ultimately responsible for the layers, columns and nuclei of the brain.
However, experimental proof of this particular function of cadherins has proven
difficult to obtain and the question is still not clear. Alternatively,
non-specific, non-combinatorial, purely quantitative adhesive differentials have 
been proposed to explain neuronal sorting in the brain. Do cadherin combinations 
underlie brain cytoarchitecture? We approached this question using as model a
well-defined forebrain nucleus, the mammillary body (MBO), which shows strong,
homogeneous expression of one single cadherin (Cdh11) and patterned,
combinatorial expression of Cdh6, -8 and -10. We found that, besides the known
combinatorial Cdh pattern, MBO cells are organized into a second, non-overlapping
pattern grouping neurons with the same date of neurogenesis. We report that, in
the Foxb1 mouse mutant, Cdh11 expression fails to be maintained during MBO
development. This disrupted the combination-based as well as the birthdate-based 
sorting in the mutant MBO. In utero RNA interference (RNAi) experiments knocking 
down Cdh11 in MBO-fated migrating neurons at one specific age showed that Cdh11
expression is required for chronological entrance in the MBO. Our results suggest
that neuronal sorting in the developing MBO is caused by adhesion-based,
non-combinatorial mechanisms that keep neurons sorted according to birthdate
information (possibly matching them to target neurons chronologically sorted in
the same manner). Non-specific adhesion mechanisms would also prevent cadherin
combinations from altering the birthdate-based sorting. Cadherin combinations
would presumably act later to support specific synaptogenesis through specific
axonal fasciculation and final target recognition.

PMCID: PMC4365714
PMID: 25852491  [PubMed]


8. Neurosci Lett. 2014 Apr 30;566:111-4. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2014.02.028. Epub
2014 Feb 24.

Coaxiality of Foxb1- and parvalbumin-expressing neurons in the lateral
hypothalamic PV1-nucleus.

Bilella A(1), Alvarez-Bolado G(2), Celio MR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Anatomy Unit, Department of Medicine and Program in Neuroscience, University
of Fribourg, CH-1700 Fribourg, Switzerland. (2)Institute of Anatomy and Cell
Biology, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 307, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany. (3)Anatomy Unit, Department of Medicine and Program in Neuroscience,
University of Fribourg, CH-1700 Fribourg, Switzerland. Electronic address:
marco.celio@unifr.ch.

In the ventrolateral hypothalamus, the PV1-nucleus is defined by its population
of parvalbumin-expressing neurons. During embryogenesis, the ventrolateral
hypothalamus is colonized also by Foxb1-expressing neurons. In adult Foxb1-EGFP
mice, many immunofluorescent neurons were found within the region that is
occupied by the PV1-nucleus. They formed a cloud around the axial cord of the
parvalbumin-immunopositive cells, which they greatly outnumber (3:1). Only a
small proportion of the neurons in the PV1-nucleus co-expressed both parvalbumin 
and Foxb1. In the light of these findings, a redesignation of this lateral
hypothalamic structure as the PV1-Foxb1 nucleus would more accurately reflect its
specific biochemical properties.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24576653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Eur J Med Genet. 2014 Mar;57(4):163-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.02.001. Epub 2014
Feb 11.

Overlapping microdeletions involving 15q22.2 narrow the critical region for
intellectual disability to NARG2 and RORA.

Yamamoto T(1), Mencarelli MA(2), Di Marco C(2), Mucciolo M(3), Vascotto M(4),
Balestri P(4), Gérard M(5), Mathieu-Dramard M(5), Andrieux J(5), Breuning M(6),
Hoffer MJ(6), Ruivenkamp CA(6), Shimada S(7), Sangu N(8), Shimojima K(9), Umezu
R(10), Kawame H(11), Matsuo M(12), Saito K(12), Renieri A(2), Mari F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Tokyo Women's Medical University Institute for Integrated Medical Sciences,
Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: yamamoto.toshiyuki@twmu.ac.jp. (2)Medical
Genetics, University of Siena, Italy; Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera
Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy. (3)Medical Genetics, University of Siena,
Italy. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive
Medicine, Pediatric Neurology Unit, S. Maria alle Scotte Hospital, University of 
Siena, Siena, Italy. (5)Laboratoire de Genetique Medicale, Hopital Jeanne de
Flandre, CHRU, France. (6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (7)Tokyo Women's Medical University
Institute for Integrated Medical Sciences, Tokyo, Japan; Department of
Pediatrics, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan. (8)Tokyo Women's
Medical University Institute for Integrated Medical Sciences, Tokyo, Japan;
Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Medicine, Tokyo Women's
Medical University, Tokyo, Japan. (9)Tokyo Women's Medical University Institute
for Integrated Medical Sciences, Tokyo, Japan. (10)Department of Pediatrics,
Tokyo Women's Medical University Medical Center East, Tokyo, Japan.
(11)Department of Genetic Counseling, Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan;
Institute of Medical Genetics, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(12)Institute of Medical Genetics, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo,
Japan.

Microdeletions in the 15q22 region have not been well documented. We collected
genotype and phenotype data from five patients with microdeletions involving
15q22.2, which were between 0.7 Mb and 6.5 Mb in size; two were of de novo origin
and one was of familial origin. Intellectual disability and epilepsy are
frequently observed in patients with 15q22.2 deletions. Genotype-phenotype
correlation analysis narrowed the critical region for such neurologic symptoms to
a genomic region of 654 Kb including the NMDA receptor-regulated 2 gene (NARG2)
and the PAR-related orphan receptor A gene (RORA), either of which may be
responsible for neurological symptoms commonly observed in patients with
deletions in this region. The neighboring regions, including the forkhead box B1 
gene (FOXB1), may also be related to the additional neurological features
observed in the patients with larger deletions.

Crown Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24525055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Development. 2013 Apr;140(8):1762-73. doi: 10.1242/dev.085357.

Specification of posterior hypothalamic neurons requires coordinated activities
of Fezf2, Otp, Sim1a and Foxb1.2.

Wolf A(1), Ryu S.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics of the Nervous System, Max Planck Institute for Medical
Research, Heidelberg, Germany.

The hypothalamus is a key integrative center in the brain that consists of
diverse cell types required for a variety of functions including homeostasis,
reproduction, stress response, social and cognitive behavior. Despite our
knowledge of several transcription factors crucial for hypothalamic development, 
it is not known how the wide diversity of neuron types in the hypothalamus is
produced. In particular, almost nothing is known about the mechanisms that
specify neurons in the posteriormost part of the hypothalamus, the mammillary
area. Here, we investigated the specification of two distinct neuron types in the
mammillary area that produce the hypothalamic hormones Vasoactive intestinal
peptide (Vip) and Urotensin 1 (Uts1). We show that Vip- and Uts1-positive neurons
develop in distinct domains in the mammillary area defined by the differential
expression of the transcription factors Fezf2, Otp, Sim1a and Foxb1.2.
Coordinated activities of these factors are crucial for the establishment of the 
mammillary area subdomains and the specification of Vip- and Uts1-positive
neurons. In addition, Fezf2 is important for early development of the posterior
hypothalamus. Thus, our study provides the first molecular anatomical map of the 
posterior hypothalamus in zebrafish and identifies, for the first time, molecular
requirements underlying the specification of distinct posterior hypothalamic
neuron types.

PMID: 23533176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Apr 5;433(2):213-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.02.085. Epub 2013 Mar 4.

Sema4d is required for the development of the hindbrain boundary and skeletal
muscle in zebrafish.

Yang J(1), Zeng Z, Wei J, Jiang L, Ma Q, Wu M, Huang X, Ye S, Li Y, Ma D, Gao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Research Centre, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, PR China.

Semaphorin4d (SEMA4D), also known as CD100, an oligodendrocyte secreted R-Ras
GTPase-activating protein (GAP), affecting axonal growth is involved in a range
of processes including cell adhesion, motility, angiogenesis, immune responses
and tumour progression. However, its actual physiological mechanisms and its role
in development remain unclear. This study has focused on the role of sema4d in
the development and expression patterns in zebrafish embryos and the effect of
its suppression on development using sema4d-specific antisense
morpholino-oligonucleotides. In this study the knockdown of sema4d, expressed at 
all developmental stages, lead to defects in the hindbrain and trunk structure of
zebrafish embryos. In addition, these phenotypes appeared to be associated with
the abnormal expression of three hindbrain rhombomere boundary markers, wnt1,
epha4a and foxb1.2, and two myogenic regulatory factors, myod and myog. Further, 
a notable increase of cell apoptosis appeared in the sema4d knockdown embryos,
while no obvious reduction in cell proliferation was observed. Collectively,
these data suggest that sema4d plays an important role in the development of the 
hindbrain and skeletal muscle.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23466355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Oncogene. 2013 Jul 25;32(30):3500-9. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.363. Epub 2012 Sep 3.

Stem cell transcription factor NANOG controls cell migration and invasion via
dysregulation of E-cadherin and FoxJ1 and contributes to adverse clinical outcome
in ovarian cancers.

Siu MK(1), Wong ES, Kong DS, Chan HY, Jiang L, Wong OG, Lam EW, Chan KK, Ngan HY,
Le XF, Cheung AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, Special
Administrative Region of China, Hong Kong, China. mkysiu@hkucc.hku.hk

Ovarian cancer is the most lethal of all gynecological malignancies, and the
identification of novel prognostic and therapeutic targets for ovarian cancer is 
crucial. It is believed that only a small subset of cancer cells are endowed with
stem cell properties, which are responsible for tumor growth, metastatic
progression and recurrence. NANOG is one of the key transcription factors
essential for maintaining self-renewal and pluripotency in stem cells. This study
investigated the role of NANOG in ovarian carcinogenesis and showed
overexpression of NANOG mRNA and protein in the nucleus of ovarian cancers
compared with benign ovarian lesions. Increased nuclear NANOG expression was
significantly associated with high-grade cancers, serous histological subtypes,
reduced chemosensitivity, and poor overall and disease-free survival. Further
analysis showed NANOG is an independent prognostic factor for overall and
disease-free survival. Moreover, NANOG was highly expressed in ovarian cancer
cell lines with metastasis-associated property and in clinical samples of
metastatic foci. Stable knockdown of NANOG impeded ovarian cancer cell
proliferation, migration and invasion, which was accompanied by an increase in
mRNA expression of E-cadherin, caveolin-1, FOXO1, FOXO3a, FOXJ1 and FOXB1.
Conversely, ectopic NANOG overexpression enhanced ovarian cancer cell migration
and invasion along with decreased E-cadherin, caveolin-1, FOXO1, FOXO3a, FOXJ1
and FOXB1 mRNA expression. Importantly, we found Nanog-mediated cell migration
and invasion involved its regulation of E-cadherin and FOXJ1. This is the first
report revealing the association between NANOG expression and clinical outcome of
patients with ovarian cancers, suggesting NANOG to be a potential prognostic
marker and therapeutic molecular target in ovarian cancer.

PMID: 22945654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Dev Biol. 2011 Dec 1;360(1):11-29. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.09.005. Epub 2011
Sep 16.

The forkhead transcription factor FoxB1 regulates the dorsal-ventral and
anterior-posterior patterning of the ectoderm during early Xenopus embryogenesis.

Takebayashi-Suzuki K(1), Kitayama A, Terasaka-Iioka C, Ueno N, Suzuki A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Amphibian Biology, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Science, Kagamiyama 1-3-1, Higashi-Hiroshima, Japan.

The formation of the dorsal-ventral (DV) and anterior-posterior (AP) axes,
fundamental to the body plan of animals, is regulated by several groups of
polypeptide growth factors including the TGF-ß, FGF, and Wnt families. In order
to ensure the establishment of the body plan, the processes of DV and AP axis
formation must be linked and coordinately regulated. However, the molecular
mechanisms responsible for these interactions remain unclear. Here, we
demonstrate that the forkhead box transcription factor FoxB1, which is
upregulated by the neuralizing factor Oct-25, plays an important role in the
formation of the DV and AP axes. Overexpression of FoxB1 promoted neural
induction and inhibited BMP-dependent epidermal differentiation in ectodermal
explants, thereby regulating the DV patterning of the ectoderm. In addition,
FoxB1 was also found to promote the formation of posterior neural tissue in both 
ectodermal explants and whole embryos, suggesting its involvement in embryonic AP
patterning. Using knockdown analysis, we found that FoxB1 is required for the
formation of posterior neural tissues, acting in concert with the Wnt and FGF
pathways. Consistent with this, FoxB1 suppressed the formation of anterior
structures via a process requiring the function of XWnt-8 and eFGF.
Interestingly, while downregulation of FoxB1 had little effect on neural
induction, we found that it functionally interacted with its upstream factor
Oct-25 and plays a supportive role in the induction and/or maintenance of neural 
tissue. Our results suggest that FoxB1 is part of a mechanism that fine-tunes,
and leads to the coordinated formation of, the DV and AP axes during early
development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21958745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Front Psychiatry. 2011 Jul 1;2:40. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2011.00040. eCollection
2011.

Changes in maternal gene expression in olfactory circuits in the immediate
postpartum period.

Canavan SV(1), Mayes LC, Treloar HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine New Haven, CT, 
USA.

Regulation of maternal behavior in the immediate postpartum period involves
neural circuits in reward and homeostasis systems responding to cues from the
newborn. Our aim was to assess one specific regulatory mechanism: the role that
olfaction plays in the onset and modulation of parenting behavior. We focused on 
changes in gene expression in olfactory brain regions, examining nine genes found
in previous knockout studies to be necessary for maternal behavior. Using a
quantitative PCR (qPCR)-based approach, we assessed changes in gene expression in
response to exposure to pups in 11 microdissected olfactory brain regions. Over
the first postpartum days, all nine genes were detected in all 11 regions (at
differing levels) and their expression changed in response to pup exposure. As a 
general trend, five genes (Dbh, Esr1, FosB, Foxb1, and Oxtr) were found to
decrease their expression in most of the olfactory regions examined, while two
genes (Mest and Prlr) were found to increase expression. Nos1 and Peg3 levels
remained relatively stable except in the accessory olfactory bulb (AOB), where
greater than fourfold increases in expression were observed. The largest
magnitude expression changes in this study were found in the AOB, which mediates 
a variety of olfactory cues that elicit stereotypic behaviors such as mating and 
aggression as well as some non-pheromone odors. Previous analyses of null mice
for the nine genes assessed here have rarely examined olfactory function. Our
data suggest that there may be olfactory effects in these null mice which
contribute to the observed maternal behavioral phenotypes. Collectively, these
data support the hypothesis that olfactory processing is an important sensory
regulator of maternal behavior.

PMCID: PMC3130163
PMID: 21747772  [PubMed]


15. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20315. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020315. Epub 2011 May 20.

Interaction between axons and specific populations of surrounding cells is
indispensable for collateral formation in the mammillary system.

Szabó NE(1), Zhao T, Çankaya M, Stoykova A, Zhou X, Alvarez-Bolado G.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Development Group, Max Planck Institute of Biophysical Chemistry,
Göttingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: An essential phenomenon during brain development is the extension of 
long collateral branches by axons. How the local cellular environment contributes
to the initial sprouting of these branches in specific points of an axonal shaft 
remains unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The principal mammillary tract (pm) is a landmark
axonal bundle connecting ventral diencephalon to brainstem (through the
mammillotegmental tract, mtg). Late in development, the axons of the principal
mammillary tract sprout collateral branches at a very specific point forming a
large bundle whose target is the thalamus. Inspection of this model showed a
number of distinct, identified cell populations originated in the dorsal and the 
ventral diencephalon and migrating during development to arrange themselves into 
several discrete groups around the branching point. Further analysis of this
system in several mouse lines carrying mutant alleles of genes expressed in
defined subpopulations (including Pax6, Foxb1, Lrp6 and Gbx2) together with the
use of an unambiguous genetic marker of mammillary axons revealed: 1) a specific 
group of Pax6-expressing cells in close apposition with the prospective branching
point is indispensable to elicit axonal branching in this system; and 2)
cooperation of transcription factors Foxb1 and Pax6 to differentially regulate
navigation and fasciculation of distinct branches of the principal mammillary
tract.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results define for the first time a model system
where interaction of the axonal shaft with a specific group of surrounding cells 
is essential to promote branching. Additionally, we provide insight on the
cooperative transcriptional regulation necessary to promote and organize an
intricate axonal tree.

PMCID: PMC3098884
PMID: 21625468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Neurosci. 2009 May 27;29(21):6989-7002. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1089-09.2009.

Role of neuroepithelial Sonic hedgehog in hypothalamic patterning.

Szabó NE(1), Zhao T, Cankaya M, Theil T, Zhou X, Alvarez-Bolado G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genes and Behavior, Max Planck Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry, D-37077 Göttingen, Germany.

The hypothalamus is a region of the diencephalon with particularly complex
patterning. Sonic hedgehog (Shh), encoding a protein with key developmental
roles, shows a peculiar and dynamic diencephalic expression pattern. Here, we use
transgenic strategies and in vitro experiments to test the hypothesis that Shh
expressed in the diencephalic neuroepithelium (neural Shh) coordinates tissue
growth and patterning in the hypothalamus. Our results show that neural Shh
coordinates anteroposterior and dorsoventral patterning in the hypothalamus and
in the diencephalon-telencephalon junction. Neural Shh also coordinates
mediolateral hypothalamic patterning, since it is necessary for the lateral
hypothalamus to attain proper size and is required for the specification of
hypocretin/orexin cells. Finally, neural Shh is necessary to maintain expression 
of differentiation markers including survival factor Foxb1.

PMID: 19474326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Eur J Neurosci. 2008 Nov;28(10):1941-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06503.x.

Genetic mapping of Foxb1-cell lineage shows migration from caudal diencephalon to
telencephalon and lateral hypothalamus.

Zhao T(1), Szabó N, Ma J, Luo L, Zhou X, Alvarez-Bolado G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genes and Behavior, Brain Development Group, Max Planck
Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.

The hypothalamus is a brain region with vital functions, and alterations in its
development can cause human disease. However, we still do not have a complete
description of how this complex structure is put together during embryonic and
early postnatal stages. Radially oriented, outside-in migration of cells is
prevalent in the developing hypothalamus. In spite of this, cell contingents from
outside the hypothalamus as well as tangential hypothalamic migrations also have 
an important role. Here we study migrations in the hypothalamic primordium by
genetically labeling the Foxb1 diencephalic lineage. Foxb1 is a transcription
factor gene expressed in the neuroepithelium of the developing neural tube with a
rostral expression boundary between caudal and rostral diencephalon, and
therefore appropriate for marking migrations from caudal levels into the
hypothalamus. We have found a large, longitudinally oriented migration stream
apparently originating in the thalamic region and following an axonal bundle to
end in the anterior portion of the lateral hypothalamic area. Additionally, we
have mapped a specific expansion of the neuroepithelium into the rostral
diencephalon. The expanded neuroepithelium generates abundant neurons for the
medial hypothalamus at the tuberal level. Finally, we have uncovered novel
diencephalon-to-telencephalon migrations into septum, piriform cortex and
amygdala.

PMCID: PMC2777254
PMID: 19046377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Genesis. 2007 Dec;45(12):781-7.

Foxb1-driven Cre expression in somites and the neuroepithelium of diencephalon,
brainstem, and spinal cord.

Zhao T(1), Zhou X, Szabó N, Leitges M, Alvarez-Bolado G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genes and Behavior, Max Planck Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry, Brain Development Group, D-37077 Göttingen, Germany.

We have knocked-in Cre-IRES-EGFP in the Foxb1 locus by homologous recombination
in embryonic stem cells. We removed the PGK-neo cassette (which was flanked by
FRT sequences) by crossing with the FLPeR deleter mouse. The Foxb1(Cre) line
showed Cre recombinase activity as well as EGFP fluorescence reproducing Foxb1
expression accurately. By crossing Foxb1(Cre) mice with the ROSA26R and Z/AP
mouse reporter lines we have been able to trace the lineage of Foxb1-expressing
cells. Early transient expression of Foxb1 in the paraxial mesoderm translates
into labeling of the somites. In the central nervous system (CNS), the Foxb1
lineage includes the thalamus and mammillary body (hypothalamus), brainstem, and 
the ventral spinal cord and floor plate.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18064677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Immunol. 2007 May 15;178(10):6058-65.

Nasal cholera toxin elicits IL-5 and IL-5 receptor alpha-chain expressing B-1a B 
cells for innate mucosal IgA antibody responses.

Kataoka K(1), Fujihashi K, Sekine S, Fukuiwa T, Kobayashi R, Suzuki H, Nagata H, 
Takatsu K, Shizukuishi S, McGhee JR, Fujihashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Immunobiology Vaccine Center, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

In this study, we examine whether native cholera toxin (nCT) as a mucosal
adjuvant can support trinitrophenyl (TNP)-LPS-specific mucosal immune responses. 
C57BL/6 mice were given nasal TNP-LPS in the presence or absence of nCT. Five
days later, significantly higher levels of TNP-specific mucosal IgA Ab responses 
were induced in the nasal washes, saliva, and plasma of mice given nCT plus
TNP-LPS than in those given TNP-LPS alone. High numbers of TNP-specific IgA
Ab-forming cells were also detected in mucosal tissues such as the nasal passages
(NPs), the submandibular glands (SMGs), and nasopharyngeal-associated
lymphoreticular tissue of mice given nCT. Flow cytometric analysis showed that
higher numbers of surface IgA+, CD5+ B cells (B-1a B cells) in SMGs and NPs of
mice given nasal TNP-LPS plus nCT than in those given TNP-LPS alone. Furthermore,
increased levels of IL-5R alpha-chain were expressed by B-1a B cells in SMGs and 
NPs of mice given nasal TNP-LPS plus nCT. Thus, CD4+ T cells from these mucosal
effector lymphoid tissues produce high levels of IL-5 at both protein and mRNA
levels. When mice were treated with anti-IL-5 mAb, significant reductions in
TNP-specific mucosal IgA Ab responses were noted in external secretions. These
findings show that nasal nCT as an adjuvant enhances mucosal immune responses to 
a T cell-independent Ag due to the cross-talk between IL-5Ralpha+ B-1a B cells
and IL-5-producing CD4+ T cells in the mucosal effector lymphoid tissues.

PMID: 17475830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Development. 2005 Feb;132(4):775-85. Epub 2005 Jan 19.

Wnt1 regulates neurogenesis and mediates lateral inhibition of boundary cell
specification in the zebrafish hindbrain.

Amoyel M(1), Cheng YC, Jiang YJ, Wilkinson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The formation of localised signalling centres is essential for patterning of a
number of tissues during development. Previous work has revealed that a distinct 
population of boundary cells forms at the interface of segments in the vertebrate
hindbrain, but the role of these cells is not known. We have investigated the
function of the Wnt1 signalling molecule that is expressed by boundary and roof
plate cells in the zebrafish hindbrain. Knockdown of wnt1 or of tcf3b, a mediator
of Wnt signalling, leads to ectopic expression of boundary cell markers, rfng and
foxb1.2, in non-boundary regions of the hindbrain. Ectopic boundary marker
expression also occurs following knockdown of rfng, a modulator of Notch
signalling required for wnt1 expression at hindbrain boundaries. We show that the
boundary and roof plate expression of wnt1 each contribute to upregulation of
proneural and delta gene expression and neurogenesis in non-boundary regions,
which in turn blocks ectopic boundary marker expression. Boundary cells therefore
play a key role in the regulation of cell differentiation in the zebrafish
hindbrain. The network of genes underlying the regulation of neurogenesis and
lateral inhibition of boundary cell formation by Wnt1 has a striking similarity
to mechanisms at the dorsoventral boundary in the Drosophila wing imaginal disc.

PMID: 15659486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Eur J Neurosci. 2005 Jan;21(1):219-29.

Genetic ablation of the mammillary bodies in the Foxb1 mutant mouse leads to
selective deficit of spatial working memory.

Radyushkin K(1), Anokhin K, Meyer BI, Jiang Q, Alvarez-Bolado G, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Plank Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Am Fassberg 11, Göttingen 37077, Germany.

Mammillary bodies and the mammillothalamic tract are parts of a classic neural
circuitry that has been implicated in severe memory disturbances accompanying
Korsakoff's syndrome. However, the specific role of mammillary bodies in memory
functions remains controversial, often being considered as just an extension of
the hippocampal memory system. To study this issue we used mutant mice with a
targeted mutation in the transcription factor gene Foxb1. These mice suffer
perinatal degeneration of the medial and most of the lateral mammillary nuclei,
as well as of the mammillothalamic bundle. Foxb1 mutant mice showed no deficits
in such hippocampal-dependent tasks as contextual fear conditioning and social
transmission of food preference. They were also not impaired in the spatial
reference memory test in the radial arm maze. However, Foxb1 mutants showed
deficits in the task for spatial navigation within the Barnes maze. Furthermore, 
they showed impairments in spatial working memory tasks such as the spontaneous
alternation and the working memory test in the radial arm maze. Thus, our
behavioural analysis of Foxb1 mutants suggests that the medial mammillary nuclei 
and mammillothalamic tract play a role in a specific subset of spatial tasks,
which require combined use of both spatial and working memory functions.
Therefore, the mammillary bodies and the mammillothalamic tract may form an
important route through which the working memory circuitry receives spatial
information from the hippocampus.

PMID: 15654859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1495-500.

Human FOX gene family (Review).

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Human Forkhead-box (FOX) gene family consists of at least 43 members, including
FOXA1, FOXA2, FOXA3, FOXB1, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXD1, FOXD2, FOXD3, FOXD4, FOXD5
(FOXD4L1), FOXD6 (FOXD4L3), FOXE1, FOXE2, FOXE3, FOXF1, FOXF2, FOXG1 (FOXG1B),
FOXH1, FOXI1, FOXJ1, FOXJ2, FOXJ3, FOXK1, FOXK2, FOXL1, FOXL2, FOXM1, FOXN1,
FOXN2 (HTLF), FOXN3 (CHES1), FOXN4, FOXN5 (FOXR1), FOXN6 (FOXR2), FOXO1 (FOXO1A),
FOXO2 (FOXO6), FOXO3 (FOXO3A), FOXO4 (MLLT7), FOXP1, FOXP2, FOXP3, FOXP4, and
FOXQ1. FOXE3-FOXD2 (1p33), FOXQ1-FOXF2-FOXC1 (6p25.3), and FOXF1-FOXC2-FOXL1
(16q24.1) loci are FOX gene clusters within the human genome. Members of FOX
subfamilies A-G, I-L and Q were grouped into class 1 FOX proteins, while members 
of FOX subfamilies H and M-P were grouped into class 2 FOX proteins. C-terminal
basic region within the FOX domain was the common feature of class 1 FOX
proteins. FOXH1 and FOXO1 mRNAs are expressed in human embryonic stem (ES) cells.
FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXE3, FOXL2, FOXN1, FOXP2 and FOXP3 genes are mutated in
human congenital disorders. FOXA1 gene is amplified and over-expressed in
esophageal and lung cancer. FOXM1 gene is up-regulated in pancreatic cancer and
basal cell carcinoma due to the transcriptional regulation by Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) pathway. FOXO1 gene is fused to PAX3 or PAX7 genes in rhabdomyosarcoma.
FOXO3 and FOXO4 genes are fused to MLL gene in hematological malignancies.
Deregulation of FOX family genes leads to congenital disorders, diabetes
mellitus, or carcinogenesis. Expression profiles, genetic alterations and
epigenetic changes of FOX family genes as well as binding proteins and target
genes of FOX family transcription factors should be comprehensively investigated 
to develop novel therapeutics and preventives for human diseases.

PMID: 15492844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Development. 2004 Feb;131(3):613-27. Epub 2004 Jan 7.

Prep1.1 has essential genetic functions in hindbrain development and cranial
neural crest cell differentiation.

Deflorian G(1), Tiso N, Ferretti E, Meyer D, Blasi F, Bortolussi M, Argenton F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Universita' di Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35131
Padova, Italy.

In this study we analysed the function of the Meinox gene prep1.1 during
zebrafish development. Meinox proteins form heterotrimeric complexes with Hox and
Pbx members, increasing the DNA binding specificity of Hox proteins in vitro and 
in vivo. However, a role for a specific Meinox protein in the regulation of Hox
activity in vivo has not been demonstrated. In situ hybridization showed that
prep1.1 is expressed maternally and ubiquitously up to 24 hours
post-fertilization (hpf), and restricted to the head from 48 hpf onwards.
Morpholino-induced prep1.1 loss-of-function caused significant apoptosis in the
CNS. Hindbrain segmentation and patterning was affected severely, as revealed by 
either loss or defective expression of several hindbrain markers
(foxb1.2/mariposa, krox20, pax2.1 and pax6.1), including anteriorly expressed Hox
genes (hoxb1a, hoxa2 and hoxb2), the impaired migration of facial nerve motor
neurons, and the lack of reticulospinal neurons (RSNs) except Mauthner cells.
Furthermore, the heads of prep1.1 morphants lacked all pharyngeal cartilages.
This was not caused by the absence of neural crest cells or their impaired
migration into the pharyngeal arches, as shown by expression of dlx2 and snail1, 
but by the inability of these cells to differentiate into chondroblasts. Our
results indicate that prep1.1 has a unique genetic function in craniofacial
chondrogenesis and, acting as a member of Meinox-Pbc-Hox trimers, it plays an
essential role in hindbrain development.

PMID: 14711874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. EMBO Rep. 2001 Jul;2(7):563-7.

Brakes and gas pedals. Meeting: Spetses 2000, molecular mechanisms of development
and disease.

Clapier CR(1), de Boer J, Pacold ME, Tamme R, van Dinten LC.

Author information: 
(1)Adolf Butenandt Institut, Molekularbiologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität,
München, Germany.

PMCID: PMC1083954
PMID: 11463738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Genesis. 2001 Feb;29(2):60-71.

The winged helix gene, Foxb1, controls development of mammary glands and regions 
of the CNS that regulate the milk-ejection reflex.

Kloetzli JM(1), Fontaine-Glover IA, Brown ER, Kuo M, Labosky PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia 19104-6058, USA.

The ability to lactate is a process restricted to mammals and is necessary for
the survival of nonhuman mammals. Female mice carrying a null mutation in the
winged helix transcription factor Foxb1 (previously Mf3/Fkh5/TWH) have lactation 
defects on inbred genetic backgrounds. To determine the cellular basis of the
Foxb1 lactation defect we have inserted a tau-lacZ lineage marker into the locus 
to follow the fate of Foxb1 expressing cells. This approach has revealed that
Foxb1 is expressed in epithelial cells of developing and adult mammary glands as 
well as previously described regions of the central nervous system. Mammary
glands from C57BL/6 Foxb1-/- mice have incomplete lobuloalveolar development. In 
addition, the tau-lacZ lineage label was used to determine that the
mammillothalamic tract was lost in all Foxb1-/- mice. Finally, morphological
defects in the inferior colliculi of the midbrain in Foxb1-/- mice correlate with
the inability to lactate, suggesting that the midbrain defect, but not the loss
of the mammillothalamic tract, may be responsible for the lactation defect.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11170346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Dev Neurosci. 2000;22(3):197-206.

Expression of Foxb1 reveals two strategies for the formation of nuclei in the
developing ventral diencephalon.

Alvarez-Bolado G(1), Zhou X, Cecconi F, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.

Fork head b1 (Foxb1; also called Fkh5, HFH-e5.1, Mf3) is a winged helix
transcription factor gene whose widespread early expression in the developing
neural tube is soon restricted to the ventral and caudal diencephalon. During
diencephalic neurogenesis, Foxb1 is expressed in one patch of neuroepithelium
comprising a large mammillary portion and a smaller tuberal portion. The labeled 
cells coming from this patch contribute to nuclear formation by means of two
different strategies: (1) caudally, the young neurons aggregate and settle
immediately, giving rise to the nuclei of the mammillary body; (2) rostrally, the
young neurons separate from the neuroepithelium forming a trail of cells which
spans the mantle layer mediolaterally and which will give rise to two separate
cell groups (the dorsal premammillary and part of the lateral hypothalamic area).
Our results show the elaborate, regionalized histogenetic mechanisms necessary
for the differentiation of the caudal diencephalon; moreover, they suggest that
specifically labeled populations, arising from specifically labeled
neuroepithelial patches and giving place to specific brain nuclei could be a
common mechanism to build complex, nonlaminar regions of the forebrain.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 10894983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Development. 2000 Mar;127(5):1029-38.

Winged helix transcription factor Foxb1 is essential for access of
mammillothalamic axons to the thalamus.

Alvarez-Bolado G(1), Zhou X, Voss AK, Thomas T, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, D-37077 Goettingen, Germany.

Our aim was to study the mechanisms of brain histogenesis. As a model, we have
used the role of winged helix transcription factor gene Foxb1 in the emergence of
a very specific morphological trait of the diencephalon, the mammillary axonal
complex. Foxb1 is expressed in a large hypothalamic neuronal group (the
mammillary body), which gives origin to a major axonal bundle with branches to
thalamus, tectum and tegmentum. We have generated mice carrying a targeted
mutation of Foxb1 plus the tau-lacZ reporter. In these mutants, a subpopulation
of dorsal thalamic ventricular cells "thalamic palisade" show abnormal
persistence of Foxb1 transcriptional activity; the thalamic branch of the
mammillary axonal complex is not able to grow past these cells and enter the
thalamus. The other two branches of the mammillary axonal complex (to tectum and 
tegmentum) are unaffected by the mutation. Most of the neurons that originate the
mammillothalamic axons suffer apoptosis after navigational failure. Analysis of
chimeric brains with wild-type and Foxb1 mutant cells suggests that correct
expression of Foxb1 in the thalamic palisade is sufficient to rescue the normal
phenotype. Our results indicate that Foxb1 is essential for diencephalic
histogenesis and that it exerts its effects by controlling access to the target
by one particular axonal branch.

PMID: 10662642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 1999 Feb 5;112(2):205-15.

The fork head transcription factor Fkh5/Mf3 is a developmental marker gene for
superior colliculus layers and derivatives of the hindbrain somatic afferent
zone.

Alvarez-Bolado G(1), Cecconi F, Wehr R, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, Am Fassberg, 37077, Göttingen, Germany.

Fork head-5 (Fkh5; also known as Mf3 and TWH) is a transcription factor of the
winged helix family. As part of an extended project to understand the function of
this protein in the developing mouse brain, in the present work we have used
Fkh5/Mf3 expression as a marker to study the development of the midbrain and
hindbrain. In the midbrain, Fkh5/Mf3 is expressed in the superior colliculus, in 
the ventricular layer of the inferior colliculus and in the isthmus. In the
superior colliculus, Fkh5/Mf3 is expressed by cells of layers 4a and 4c since
early in development. In the hindbrain, Fkh5/Mf3 is a longitudinal marker (as
opposed to a transverse or rhombomeric one), since it labels nuclei belonging to 
the somatic afferent zone (ventral cochlear nucleus, cuneate and external cuneate
nuclei, principal and spinal nuclei of the trigeminal). In addition, Fkh5/Mf3 is 
expressed by the developing endopiriform nucleus and by the olivary pretectal
nucleus. The results suggest that Fkh5/Mf3 has an early role in the lamination of
the tectum and in the longitudinal differentiation of the hindbrain.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 9878737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Development. 1998 Nov;125(22):4403-16.

Determination of the zebrafish forebrain: induction and patterning.

Grinblat Y(1), Gamse J, Patel M, Sive H.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

We report an analysis of forebrain determination and patterning in the zebrafish 
Danio rerio. In order to study these events, we isolated zebrafish homologs of
two neural markers, odd-paired-like (opl), which encodes a zinc finger protein,
and fkh5, which encodes a forkhead domain protein. At mid-gastrula, expression of
these genes defines a very early pattern in the presumptive neurectoderm, with
opl later expressed in the telencephalon, and fkh5 in the diencephalon and more
posterior neurectoderm. Using in vitro explant assays, we show that forebrain
induction has occurred even earlier, by the onset of gastrulation (shield stage).
Signaling from the early gastrula shield, previously shown to be an organizing
center, is sufficient for activation of opl expression in vitro. In order to
determine whether the organizer is required for opl regulation, we removed from
late blastula stage embryos either the presumptive prechordal plate, marked by
goosecoid (gsc) expression, or the entire organizer, marked by chordin (chd)
expression. opl was correctly expressed after removal of the presumptive
prechordal plate and consistently, opl was correctly expressed in one-eyed
pinhead (oep) mutant embryos, where the prechordal plate fails to form. However, 
after removal of the entire organizer, no opl expression was observed, indicating
that this region is crucial for forebrain induction. We further show that
continued organizer function is required for forebrain induction, since beads of 
BMP4, which promotes ventral fates, also prevented opl expression when implanted 
during gastrulation. Our data show that forebrain specification begins early
during gastrulation, and that a wide area of dorsal mesendoderm is required for
its patterning.

PMID: 9778500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mech Dev. 1998 Aug;76(1-2):185-90.

The winged helix transcription factor Hfh2 is expressed in neural crest and
spinal cord during mouse development.

Labosky PA(1), Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, 36th and Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6058, USA.

The embryonic neural crest is a unique group of cells that gives rise to the
peripheral nervous system as well as many other cell types. Most of the work
describing the behavior and specification of these cells has been done in the
avian system, a system amenable to experimental manipulations such as tissue
grafting, cell transplantation and lineage tracing. This work has been greatly
facilitated by the use of molecular markers of neural crest cells such as HNK-1
and slug, markers that are not yet available for the study of mouse neural crest.
Here we demonstrate that Hfh2 (HNF3 forkhead homologue 2), a member of the
'winged helix' or 'forkhead' transcription factor gene family, is expressed in
premigratory and migrating neural crest cells in the early mouse embryo and in
motorneuron progenitors in the developing spinal cord. Using linkage analysis we 
have localized the Hfh2 gene to chromosome 4 at 44.91 cM from the centromere.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 9767163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Dev Genes Evol. 1998 Jul;208(5):245-58.

fork head domain genes in zebrafish.

Odenthal J(1), Nüsslein-Volhard C.

Author information: 
(1)MPI für Entwicklungsbiologie, Spemannstrasse 35/III, D-72076 Tübingen,
Germany.

Nine members of the fork head domain gene family (fkd1-fkd9) were isolated from
early cDNA libraries in the zebrafish. They show unique expression patterns in
whole-mount RNA in situ hybridization during the first 24 h of embryonic
development. These fkd genes fall into three of ten classes, based on sequence
similarities within the DNA-binding domain, whereas members for the other seven
classes described in other vertebrates were not found. In addition to conserved
residues at certain positions in the fork head domain, characteristic
transcription activation domains as well as similarities in expression patterns
were found for members of the different classes. Members of class I (fkd1/axial, 
fkd2/Zffkh1, fkd4 and fkd7) are differentially transcribed in unsegmented dorsal 
axial structures such as the floor plate, the notochord, the hypochord and, in
addition, the endoderm. Transcripts of fkd3 and fkd5 (class II) are mainly
detected in the cells of the ectoderm which form neural tissues, as is the case
for genes of this class in other species. RNAs of the three members of class V
(fkd6, fkd8 and fkd9) are expressed in the paraxial mesoderm and transiently in
the neuroectoderm. fkd6 is strongly expressed in neural crest cells from early
stages on, whereas fkd2 and fkd7 are transcribed in individual neural crest cells
in the pharyngula period.

PMID: 9683740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Development. 1997 Nov;124(22):4447-56.

Fkh5-deficient mice show dysgenesis in the caudal midbrain and hypothalamic
mammillary body.

Wehr R(1), Mansouri A, de Maeyer T, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Goettingen, Germany.

The murine winged helix gene Fkh5 is specifically expressed in the developing
central nervous system (CNS). Early embryonic Fkh5 expression is restricted to
the mammiliary body region of the caudal hypothalamus, midbrain, hindbrain and
spinal cord. Postnatally, signals persist in specific nuclei of the mammillary
body and in the midbrain. We generated Fkh5 deficient mice by homologous
recombination to assess its in vivo function. At birth, Fkh5-deficient mice are
viable and indistinguishable from wild-type and Fkh5 heterozygous littermates.
However, about one third die within the first two days and another fifth before
weaning. Surviving Fkh5-deficient mice become growth retarded within the first
week and remain smaller throughout their whole life span. Fkh5-deficient females 
on 129Sv x C57BL/6 genetic background are fertile, but do not nurture their pups.
More detailed analysis of Fkh5-deficient brains reveals distinct alterations in
the CNS. In the midbrain, mutant mice exhibit reduced inferior colliculi and an
overgrown anterior cerebellum. Furthermore, the hypothalamic mammillary body of
Fkh5-deficient brains lacks the medial mammillary nucleus. These results suggest 
that Fkh5 plays a major role during CNS development.

PMID: 9409663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Development. 1997 Apr;124(7):1263-74.

The winged helix gene, Mf3, is required for normal development of the
diencephalon and midbrain, postnatal growth and the milk-ejection reflex.

Labosky PA(1), Winnier GE, Jetton TL, Hargett L, Ryan AK, Rosenfeld MG, Parlow
AF, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical School, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA. plabosky@mail.med.upenn.edu

The mouse Mf3 gene, also known as Fkh5 and HFH-e5.1, encodes a winged
helix/forkhead transcription factor. In the early embryo, transcripts for Mf3 are
restricted to the presomitic mesoderm and anterior neurectoderm and mesoderm. By 
9.5 days post coitum, expression in the nervous system is predominantly in the
diencephalon, midbrain and neural tube. After midgestation, the highest level of 
mRNA is in the mammillary bodies, the posterior-most part of the hypothalamus.
Mice homozygous for a deletion of the mf3 locus on a [129 x Black Swiss]
background display variable phenotypes consistent with a requirement for the gene
at several stages of embryonic and postnatal development. Approximately six
percent of the mf3-/- embryos show an open neural tube in the diencephalon and
midbrain region, and another five percent show a severe reduction of the
posterior body axis; both these classes of affected embryos die in utero.
Surviving homozygotes have an apparently normal phenotype at birth. Postnatally, 
however, mf3-/- pups are severely growth retarded and approximately one third die
before weaning. This growth defect is not a direct result of lack of circulating 
growth hormone or thyrotropin. Mice that survive to weaning are healthy, but they
show an abnormal clasping of the hindfeet when suspended by the tail. Although
much smaller than normal, the mice are fertile. However, mf3-/- females cannot
eject their milk supply to feed their pups. This nursing defect can be corrected 
with interperitoneal injections of oxytocin. These results provide evidence that 
Mf3 is required for normal hypothalamus development and suggest that Mf3 may play
a role in postnatal growth and lactation.

PMID: 9118797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Mech Dev. 1996 Apr;55(2):221-30.

Expression of the winged helix genes fkh-4 and fkh-5 defines domains in the
central nervous system.

Kaestner KH(1), Schütz G, Monaghan AP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Centre,
Heidelberg, Germany.

The 'winged helix' or 'forkhead' transcription factor gene family is defined by a
common 100 amino acid DNA binding domain which is a variant of the
helix-turn-helix motif. Here we describe the structure and expression of the
mouse fkh-4 and fkh-5 genes. The two genes encode proteins of 427 and 324 amino
acids, respectively, with highly similar winged helix domains. Both genes are
expressed in adjacent domains in the developing diencephalon from the headfold
stage onward. Linkage analysis localised fkh-5 to chromosome 9 at 34.5
centiMorgans (cM) and fkh-4 to chromosome 19 at 10.5 cM. The potential
relationship of the two genes to the mouse mutations staggerer and small thymus
(for fkh-5) and muscle deficient (for fkh-4) is discussed.

PMID: 8861101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


