
1. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2014 Nov;18(22):3504-10.

Both genes and lncRNAs can be used as biomarkers of prostate cancer by using high
throughput sequencing data.

Cheng WS(1), Tao H, Hu EP, Liu S, Cai HR, Tao XL, Zhang L, Mao JJ, Yan DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Taizhou Municipal Hospital, Taizhou, Zhejiang, China.
dongliangyan123@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate prostate cancer-related genes and lncRNAs by using a
high throughput sequencing dataset.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: RNA-seq data were obtained from the sequencing read
archive database, including both benign and malignant tumor samples. After
aligning the RNA-seq reads to human genome reference, gene expression profile as 
well as lncRNA expression profile was obtained. Next, student's t-test was used
to screen both the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and lncRNAs (DELs)
between benign and malignant samples. Finally, goseq was used to conduct the
functional annotation of DEGs.
RESULTS: A total of 7112 DEGs were screened, such as ZNF512B, UCKL1, STMN3,
GMEB2, and PTK6. The top 10 enriched functions of DEGs were mainly related to
organism development, including multi-cellular development, system development
and anatomical structure development. Also, we discovered 26 differentially
expressed lncRNAs.
CONCLUSIONS: The analysis used in this study is reliable in screening prostate
cancer markers including both genes and lncRNAs by using RNA-seq data, which
provides new insight into the understanding of molecular mechanism of prostate
cancer.

PMID: 25491628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Immunobiology. 2012 Jan;217(1):118-23. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2011.07.018. Epub
2011 Jul 23.

IL-12 inhibits glucocorticoid-induced T cell apoptosis by inducing GMEB1 and
activating PI3K/Akt pathway.

Kawabe K(1), Lindsay D, Braitch M, Fahey AJ, Showe L, Constantinescu CS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Neurology, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Interleukin (IL)-12 is an important pro-inflammatory cytokine that has been shown
to play a role in T cell survival, at least in part by activating the PI3K/Akt
pathway. Glucocorticoid modulatory element binding protein (GMEB)1 and 2 are
closely related proteins that modify the glucocorticoid receptor binding locus
and thus modulate glucocorticoid-mediated gene induction effects, including
apoptosis. GMEB1 associates with caspases and prevents apoptosis of cells in the 
nervous system. We have observed, in preliminary studies, that IL-12 up-regulates
GMEB mRNA in human T cells, and postulated that this may contribute to the
anti-apoptotic effect of IL-12 on T cells, in particular with regard to
glucocorticoid induced apoptosis. Here, we confirm that IL-12 rescue of
dexamethasone induced T cell apoptosis involves the PI3K/Akt pathway and that
IL-12 induces GMEB1 and GMEB2. A siRNA knockdown of GMEB1 reverses the protective
effect of IL-12 on dexamethasone induced T cell apoptosis. Thus, IL-12 protects T
cells from glucocorticoid induced apoptosis via PI3K/Akt pathway and via
induction of GMEB1, which is likely to reduce transactivation of the
glucocorticoid receptor and induction of apoptotic genes. As glucocorticoid
induced apoptosis occurs both in physiological and pathological/therapeutic
situations, and IL-12 is actively involved in a variety of inflammatory and
immune responses, the ability of IL-12 to inhibit steroid responses and increase 
T cell survival through GMEB1 has wide ranging implications. Manipulating GMEB
may be used therapeutically to enhance the resistance or the sensitivity to
steroids.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21840619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Hippocampus. 2012 Feb;22(2):128-40. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20869. Epub 2010 Oct 6.

Microarray analysis of rat hippocampus exposed to excitotoxicity: reversal
Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger NCX3 is overexpressed in glial cells.

Ortuño-Sahagún D(1), Rivera-Cervantes MC, Gudiño-Cabrera G, Junyent F, Verdaguer 
E, Auladell C, Pallàs M, Camins A, Beas-Zárate C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Desarrollo y Regeneración Neural, Instituto de Neurobiología,
C.U.C.B.A, Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, Jalisco, México.

Multiple factors are involved in the glutamate-induced excitotoxicity phenomenon,
such as overload of ionotropic and metabotropic receptors, excess Ca(2+) influx, 
nitric oxide synthase activation, oxidative damage due to increase in free
radicals, and release of endogenous polyamine, among others. In order to attempt 
a more integrated approach to address this issue, we established, by microarray
analysis, the hippocampus gene expression profiles under glutamate-induced
excitotoxicity conditions. Increased gene expression is mainly related to
excitotoxicity (CaMKII, glypican 2, GFAP, NCX3, IL-2, and Gmeb2) or with cell
damage response (dynactin and Ecel1). Several genes that augmented their
expression are related to glutamatergic system modulation, in particular with
NMDA receptor modulation and calcium homeostasis (IL-2, CaMKII, acrosin, Gmeb2,
hAChE, Slc83a, and SP1 factor). Conversely, among genes that diminished their
expression, we found the Syngap 1, which is downregulated by CaMKII, and the MHC 
II, which is downregulated by glutamate. Changes observed in gene expression
induced by monosodium glutamate (MSG) neonatal treatment in the hippocampus are
consistent with the activation of the mechanisms that modulate NMDA receptor
function as well as with the implementation of plastic response to cell damage
and intracellular calcium homeostasis. Regarding this aspect, we report here that
NCX3/Slc8a3, a Na(+)/Ca(2+) membrane exchanger, is highly expressed in
astrocytes, both in vitro and in vivo, in response to glutamate-induced
excitotoxicity. Hence, the results of this analysis present a broad view of the
expression profile elicited by MSG neonatal treatment, and lead us to suggest the
possible molecular pathways of action and reaction involved under this
experimental model of excitotoxicity.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 20928830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biochemistry. 2004 Jan 13;43(1):245-55.

Structure/activity relationships for GMEB-2: the second member of the
glucocorticoid modulatory element-binding complex.

Chen J(1), He Y, Simons SS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Steroid Hormones Section, NIDDK/LMCB, National Institutes of Health, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, USA.

The position of the dose-response curve of agonist complexes of glucocorticoid
receptors (GRs), and the partial agonist activity of GR-antagonist complexes, can
be modulated by two proteins (GMEB-1 and -2), which bind as oligomers to a DNA
element that is called a glucocorticoid modulatory element, or GME. This element 
is active when located upstream of the glucocorticoid response element that
controls the expression of a reporter gene. Here, we report the
structure/activity relationships of GMEB-2 and compare them to our previous
findings for GMEB-1. Most of the activities of GMEB-2, such as homo- and
heterooligomerization, binding to GR and to CBP, DNA binding, and modulation of
the above GR transcriptional properties, require large regions of the protein.
Only the intrinsic transactivation activity could be localized to a small region 
of the protein. These studies shed light on the mechanism of action of GMEB-2 and
further support our previous conclusion that the ability of factors to modulate
the position of the dose-response curve, and the partial agonist activity, of GR 
complexes is unrelated to effects on the total levels of GR-induced gene
expression. These studies also identify regions of GMEB-2 possessing yet
unidentified properties that are critical for several activities. Finally, as the
domain organization of GMEB-2 and -1 is extremely similar, we conclude that the
quantitative differences in activities derive from variations in amino acid
sequence rather than more global features of protein structure.

PMID: 14705952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Jul;17(7):1283-95. Epub 2003 Apr 17.

Crystal structure and nuclear magnetic resonance analyses of the SAND domain from
glucocorticoid modulatory element binding protein-1 reveals deoxyribonucleic acid
and zinc binding regions.

Surdo PL(1), Bottomley MJ, Sattler M, Scheffzek K.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology
Programme, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

The glucocorticoid-modulatory element-binding proteins, GMEB1 and GMEB2, are
ubiquitous, multifunctional DNA-binding proteins with important roles in the
modulation of transcription upon steroid hormone activation. The GMEB proteins
have intrinsic transactivation ability, but also control the glucocorticoid
response via direct binding to the glucocorticoid receptor. They are also
mandatory host proteins for Parvovirus replication. Here we present the 1.55 A
resolution crystal structure of a central portion of GMEB1, encompassing its SAND
domain, which shares 80% sequence identity with the GMEB2 SAND domain. We
demonstrate that this domain, also present in numerous proteins implicated in
chromatin-associated transcriptional regulation, is necessary and sufficient to
bind the glucocorticoid-modulatory element (GME) DNA target. We use nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) and binding studies to map the DNA recognition surface
to an alpha-helical region exposing the conserved KDWK motif. Using site-directed
mutagenesis, key residues for DNA binding are identified. In contrast to the
previously determined NMR structure of the Sp100b SAND domain, we find that the
GMEB1 SAND domain also comprises a zinc-binding motif. Although the zinc ion is
not necessary for DNA binding, it is found to determine the C-terminal
conformation of the GMEB1 SAND domain. We also show that homologous zinc-binding 
motifs exist in a subset of SAND domain proteins and probe the roles of this
novel motif.

PMID: 12702733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Jul;14(7):1010-27.

Properties of the glucocorticoid modulatory element binding proteins GMEB-1 and
-2: potential new modifiers of glucocorticoid receptor transactivation and
members of the family of KDWK proteins.

Kaul S(1), Blackford JA Jr, Chen J, Ogryzko VV, Simons SS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Steroid Hormones Section, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases/Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0805, USA.

An important component of glucocorticoid steroid induction of tyrosine
aminotransferase (TAT) gene expression is the glucocorticoid modulatory element
(GME), which is located at -3.6 kb of the rat TAT gene. The GME both mediates a
greater sensitivity to hormone, due to a left shift in the dose-response curve of
agonists, and increases the partial agonist activity of antiglucocorticoids.
These properties of the GME are intimately related to the binding of a
heteromeric complex of two proteins (GMEB-1 and -2). We previously cloned the rat
GMEB-2 as a 67-kDa protein. We now report the cloning of the other member of the 
GME binding complex, the 88-kDa human GMEB-1, and various properties of both
proteins. GMEB-1 and -2 each possess an intrinsic transactivation activity in
mammalian one-hybrid assays, consistent with our proposed model in which they
modify glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-regulated gene induction. This hypothesis is 
supported by interactions between GR and both GMEB-1 and -2 in mammalian
two-hybrid and in pull-down assays. Furthermore, overexpression of GMEB-1 and -2,
either alone or in combination, results in a reversible right shift in the
dose-response curve, and decreased agonist activity of antisteroids, as expected 
from the squelching of other limiting factors. Additional mechanistic details
that are compatible with the model of GME action are suggested by the
interactions in a two-hybrid assay of both GMEBs with CREB-binding protein (CBP) 
and the absence of histone acetyl transferase (HAT) activity in both proteins.
GMEB-1 and -2 share a sequence of 90 amino acids that is 80% identical. This
region also displays homology to several other proteins containing a core
sequence of KDWK. Thus, the GMEBs may be members of a new family of factors with 
interesting transcriptional properties.

PMID: 10894151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Apr 15;28(8):1819-29.

Genomic organization of human GMEB-1 and rat GMEB-2: structural conservation of
two multifunctional proteins.

Zeng H(1), Kaul S, Simons SS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Steroid Hormones Section, Building 8, Room B2A-07, NIDDK/LMCB, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The glucocorticoid modulatory element binding proteins 1 and 2 (GMEB-1 and
GMEB-2) are of interest both for their multiple activities (e.g. modulation of
transactivation by the glucocorticoid receptor and initiation of parvovirus
replication) and their membership in the emerging family of KDWK proteins. The
genomic sequence of these proteins was desired in order to begin studies on the
control of GMEB expression and to pursue previous evidence for significant
homologies between the GMEBs. We now report the genomic sequence of human GMEB-1 
and rat GMEB-2. The structure of both genes, including portions of the introns,
is highly conserved. However, GMEB-1 and GMEB-2 were found to reside on
chromosomes 1 and 20, respectively, demonstrating that they are encoded by
distinctly different genes. Several isoforms of the GMEBs have been reported or
detected in this study, and the splicing patterns were determined. The tissue
distribution of each GMEB is not the same and is highest in fetal and developing 
tissues, consistent with previous suggestions that both homo- and
hetero-oligomers may possess biological activity. The promoter region of both
genes has been identified and both display high levels of transcription activity 
in transiently transfected cells when fused upstream of a promoterless reporter. 
These results indicate that the GMEBs are proteins that evolved from a single
parent gene, have been highly conserved since the divergence of rats and humans
and probably play important roles in development and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC102812
PMID: 10734202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. FEBS Lett. 2000 Feb 25;468(2-3):203-10.

Cloning of a mouse glucocorticoid modulatory element binding protein, a new
member of the KDWK family.

Jimenez-Lara AM(1), Heine MJ, Gronemeyer H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, P.O. Box 163, 67404, Illkirch, France.

A mouse cDNA that encodes a nuclear DNA binding protein was identified by yeast
two-hybrid screening using the activation domain 2 of the nuclear receptor
coactivator TIF2 as a bait. BLAST analysis revealed that the identified cDNA
encodes a KDWK domain and contains sequences almost identical to three tryptic
peptides of rat GMEB-1 which together with the GMEB-2 heterodimeric partner binds
to the GME/CRE sequence (glucocorticoid modulatory element) of the tyrosine
aminotransferase (TAT) promoter. Mouse GMEB-1 is ubiquitously expressed in all
the tissues examined. In vitro translated mGMEB-1 bound specifically to GME
oligonucleotides, either alone or as a heterodimer with rGMEB-2. Transient
transfection experiments with TAT promoter reporter genes suggest a potential
role for mGMEB-1 as a transcriptional regulator of the TAT promoter.

PMID: 10692587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. FEBS Lett. 1999 Jun 11;452(3):170-6.

Cloning and characterization of hGMEB1, a novel glucocorticoid modulatory element
binding protein.

Thériault JR(1), Charette SJ, Lambert H, Landry J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, L'Hôtel-Dieu de
Québec, Que., Canada.

A 21-bp element called glucocorticoid modulatory element (GME) modulates the
glucocorticoid receptor-mediated responses via the binding of an as yet poorly
characterized transacting complex of proteins containing the 88-kDa GMEB1 and the
67-kDa GMEB2. Using heat shock protein 27 (HSP27) as bait in the yeast two-hybrid
assay, we cloned a 1.83-kb cDNA encoding a novel 573-amino acid protein called
human GMEB1 (hGMEB1). hGMEB1 possesses a KDWK domain, contains sequences almost
identical (36/38) to three tryptic peptides of rat GMEB1 and shares 38% identity 
with rat GMEB2. hGMEB1 is ubiquitously expressed as a 85-kDa protein in all cell 
lines and tissues examined. In vitro translated hGMEB1 bound specifically to GME 
oligonucleotides yielding a complex of similar size to the complex obtained using
rat liver nuclear extracts. Both complexes were supershifted with an antibody
specific to hGMEB1. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed the in vivo
interaction of HSP27 with hGMEB1.

PMID: 10386584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 10;273(28):17756-62.

Cloning and characterization of a novel binding factor (GMEB-2) of the
glucocorticoid modulatory element.

Zeng H(1), Jackson DA, Oshima H, Simons SS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Steroid Hormones Section, NIDDK/LMCB, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

The 21-base pair glucocorticoid modulatory element (GME) of the rat tyrosine
aminotransferase gene is the only cis-acting element known to modulate the
transcriptional activity of receptors bound to glucocorticoid response elements. 
Specifically, the GME increases the activity of complexes bound both by
physiological concentrations of glucocorticoids, due to a left shift in the
dose-response curve, and by saturating concentrations of anti-glucocorticoids.
For this reason, the nuclear protein(s) that has been demonstrated to bind to the
GME is of major interest as a possible transcription factor with hitherto
undescribed properties. Subsequent studies indicated that not one but two
proteins of 88 and 67 kDa (= GMEB-1 and -2, respectively) formed a heteromeric
complex with double-stranded GME oligonucleotides in gel shift assays and
participated in the expression of GME activity (Oshima, H., Szapary, D., and
Simons, S. S., Jr. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 21893-21910). Here, we report the
use of polymerase chain reaction of degenerate oligonucleotides and 5'- and
3'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends to clone two cDNAs of 2. 0 and 1.9 kilobase
pairs that probably result from alternative splicing. Both cDNAs encoded open
reading frames containing all four previously sequenced peptides. The longer
2.0-kilobase pair cDNA encoded an open reading frame for an acidic, 529-amino
acid protein and afforded a major 67-kDa and a minor 58-kDa protein after in
vitro transcription/translation. Both proteins were recognized by a mono-epitopic
antibody raised against a peptide of GMEB-2. The in vitro translated protein
bound to GME DNA in gel shift assays. However, the binding to GME DNA increased
markedly after mixing with authentic GMEB-1 to give a gel-shifted complex that
was similar to that derived from HTC cell cytosol. GMEB-2 shares a unique domain 
(KDWKR) with proteins derived from diverse organisms as follows: Drosophila
(DEAF-I), rat (Suppressin), and Caenorhabditis elegans (three unknown open
reading frames). Collectively, these data suggest that the 67-kDa GMEB-2 not only
is an important factor for the modulation of glucocorticoid receptor bound to
glucocorticoid response elements but also may belong to a novel family of
transcription factors.

PMID: 9651376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 15;270(37):21893-901.

The factor binding to the glucocorticoid modulatory element of the tyrosine
aminotransferase gene is a novel and ubiquitous heteromeric complex.

Oshima H(1), Szapary D, Simons SS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Steroid Hormones Section, NIDDK/Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Glucocorticoid induction of the tyrosine aminotransferase gene deviates from that
of many glucocorticoid-responsive genes by having a lower EC50 and displaying
more agonist activity with a given antiglucocorticoid. A cis-acting element,
located 3646 base pairs upstream of the start of tyrosine aminotransferase gene
transcription, has been found to be sufficient to reproduce these variations with
heterologous genes and promoters (Oshima, H., and Simons, S.S., Jr. (1992) Mol.
Endocrinol. 6, 416-428). This element has been called a glucocorticoid modulatory
element, or GME. Others have called this sequence a cyclic AMP-responsive element
(CRE) due to the binding of the cyclic AMP response element binding protein
(CREB). We now report the partial purification and characterization of two new
proteins (GMEB1 and -2) of 88 and 67 kDa that bind to the GME/CRE as a
heteromeric complex. This purification was followed by the formation of a
previously characterized, biologically relevant band in gel shift assays. By
several biochemical criteria, the GMEBs differed from many of the previously
described CREB/CREM/ATF family members. Partial peptide sequencing revealed that 
the sequences of these two proteins have not yet been described. Size exclusion
chromatography and molecular weight measurements of the gel-shifted band
demonstrated that the GMEBs bound to the GME as a macromolecular complex of about
550 kDa that could be dissociated by deoxycholate. Similar experiments showed
that CREB bound to the GME as heteromeric complexes of about 310 and 360 kDa. As 
determined from gel shift assays, GMEB1 and -2 are not restricted to rat liver
cells but appear to be ubiquitous. Thus, these novel GMEBs may participate in a
similar modulation of other glucocorticoid-inducible genes in a variety of cells.

PMID: 7665613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Receptor. 1995 Fall;5(3):133-43.

Purification of the glucocorticoid receptor-mineralocorticoid receptor
modulator-2 from rabbit liver.

Bodine PV(1), Litwack G.

Author information: 
(1)Women's Health Research Institute, Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, Radnor, PA
19087, USA.

Modulators-1 and -2 are endogenous low-mol-wt regulators of glucocorticoid and
mineralocorticoid receptors and protein kinase C. Structural analysis of
apparently purified modulators suggested that these molecules were novel ether
aminophosphoglycerides. Subsequent X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy
indicated that the ultra-large scale modulator preparations were contaminated
with glutamate and aspartate, although these amino acids lacked modulator
activity. In this article, we describe the purification of modulator-2 from
rabbit liver cytosol and the separation of this phosphoglyceride from these amino
acids. This purification was similar to the ultra-large scale version (Bodine,
P.V. and Litwack, G. [1990] J. Biol. Chem. 265, 9544-9554), but involved the
chromatography of trypsinized rabbit liver cytosol on the 7-L bed volume Sephadex
G-15 gel-filtration column. As before, two peaks of modulator activity
(modulator-1 and -2), as well as a DNA-binding inhibitor (peak-3), eluted from
the gel-filtration column. The resulting modulator-2 pool was incubated with
glutamate decarboxylase and treated batch-wise with Dowex-50W cation-exchange
resin and Chelex-100 resin. This enzyme/resin-treated modulator-2 preparation was
then chromatographed on a Dowex-1 anion-exchange column. Finally, modulator-2 was
purified by preparative silica TLC. This last purification step resulted in the
separation of modulator-2 from glutamate, aspartate, and gamma-aminobutyrate. In 
summary, rabbit liver cytosol appears to be a reasonable source of modulator-2.
In addition, treatment of the preparation with glutamate decarboxylase seems to
facilitate the subsequent separation of modulator-2 from the contaminating amino 
acids.

PMID: 8729193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


