
1. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 15;21(14):3264-74. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds170. Epub 2012 Apr
27.

Discovery of novel protein partners of the transcription factor FOXL2 provides
insights into its physiopathological roles.

L'Hôte D(1), Georges A, Todeschini AL, Kim JH, Benayoun BA, Bae J, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, UMR 7592 CNRS-Université Paris Diderot, Paris 75205,
France.

FOXL2 transcription factor is responsible for the Blepharophimosis Ptosis
Epicantus inversus Syndrome (BPES), a genetic disease involving craniofacial
malformations often associated with ovarian failure. Recently, a somatic FOXL2
mutation (p.C134W) has been reported in >95% of adult-type granulosa cell tumors.
Here, we have identified 10 novel FOXL2 partners by yeast-two-hybrid screening
and co-immunoprecipitation. Most BPES-inducing mutated FOXL2 proteins display
aggregation in cultured cells. Here, we show that two of the partners (NR2C1 and 
GMEB1) can be sequestered in such aggregates. This co-aggregation can contribute 
to the pathogenesis of FOXL2 mutations. We have also measured the effects of
FOXL2 interactants on the transcriptional regulation of a series of target
promoters. Some of the partners (CXXC4, CXXC5, BANF1) were able to repress FOXL2 
activity indistinctively of the promoter. Interestingly, CREM-t2a, which acted as
a repressor on most promoters, increased wild-type (WT) FOXL2 activity on two
promoters (PTGS2 and CYP19A1), but was unable to increase the activity of the
oncogenic mutant p.C134W. Conversely, GMEB1, which also acted as a repressor on
most promoters and increased WT FOXL2 activity on the Per2 promoter, increased to
a greater extent the activity of the p.C134W variant. Interestingly, partners
with intrinsic pro-apoptotic effect were able to increase apoptosis induction by 
WT FOXL2, but not by the p.C134W mutant, whereas partners with an anti-apoptotic 
effect decreased apoptosis induction by both FOXL2 versions. Altogether, these
results suggest that the p.C134W mutated form fails to integrate signals through 
protein-protein interactions to regulate target promoter subsets and in
particular to induce cell death.

PMID: 22544055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Immunobiology. 2012 Jan;217(1):118-23. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2011.07.018. Epub
2011 Jul 23.

IL-12 inhibits glucocorticoid-induced T cell apoptosis by inducing GMEB1 and
activating PI3K/Akt pathway.

Kawabe K(1), Lindsay D, Braitch M, Fahey AJ, Showe L, Constantinescu CS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Neurology, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Interleukin (IL)-12 is an important pro-inflammatory cytokine that has been shown
to play a role in T cell survival, at least in part by activating the PI3K/Akt
pathway. Glucocorticoid modulatory element binding protein (GMEB)1 and 2 are
closely related proteins that modify the glucocorticoid receptor binding locus
and thus modulate glucocorticoid-mediated gene induction effects, including
apoptosis. GMEB1 associates with caspases and prevents apoptosis of cells in the 
nervous system. We have observed, in preliminary studies, that IL-12 up-regulates
GMEB mRNA in human T cells, and postulated that this may contribute to the
anti-apoptotic effect of IL-12 on T cells, in particular with regard to
glucocorticoid induced apoptosis. Here, we confirm that IL-12 rescue of
dexamethasone induced T cell apoptosis involves the PI3K/Akt pathway and that
IL-12 induces GMEB1 and GMEB2. A siRNA knockdown of GMEB1 reverses the protective
effect of IL-12 on dexamethasone induced T cell apoptosis. Thus, IL-12 protects T
cells from glucocorticoid induced apoptosis via PI3K/Akt pathway and via
induction of GMEB1, which is likely to reduce transactivation of the
glucocorticoid receptor and induction of apoptotic genes. As glucocorticoid
induced apoptosis occurs both in physiological and pathological/therapeutic
situations, and IL-12 is actively involved in a variety of inflammatory and
immune responses, the ability of IL-12 to inhibit steroid responses and increase 
T cell survival through GMEB1 has wide ranging implications. Manipulating GMEB
may be used therapeutically to enhance the resistance or the sensitivity to
steroids.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21840619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Jun;37(10):3301-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp192. Epub 2009 Mar
25.

A WW-like module in the RAG1 N-terminal domain contributes to previously
unidentified protein-protein interactions.

Maitra R(1), Sadofsky MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York,
10461, USA.

More than one-third of the RAG1 protein can be truncated from the N-terminus with
only subtle effects on the products of V(D)J recombination in vitro or in a
mouse. What, then, is the function of the N-terminal domain? We believe it to be 
regulatory. We determined, several years ago, that an included RING motif could
function as an ubiquitin E3 ligase. Whether this activity is limited to
automodification, or may alter other proteins in the cell, remains an open
question. We revisited the issue of additional protein-protein interactions
between RAG1 and other proteins by means of the yeast two-hybrid assay. We
confirmed the interaction already described with KPNA2/RCH1/SRP1alpha and found
two others--to the transcription factor GMEB1/PIF p96 and the splicing factor
SF3A2/SF3a66. A luciferase reporter assay demonstrates that a protein complex
containing RAG proteins and the transcription factor can assemble in cells.
Further mapping identified a region within the N-terminal domain resembling a WW 
motif. Point mutation directed at residues conserved in WW motifs eliminated
binding to one of the partners. Phylogenetic analysis shows the WW-like module to
be highly conserved. The module contributes to protein-protein interactions that 
may also influence how RAG1 binds DNA targets.

PMCID: PMC2691831
PMID: 19324890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Neurosci Lett. 2008 Jun 13;438(1):34-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.04.023. Epub
2008 Apr 11.

GMEB1, a novel endogenous caspase inhibitor, prevents hypoxia- and oxidative
stress-induced neuronal apoptosis.

Nakagawa T(1), Tsuruma K, Uehara T, Nomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

The interaction of glucocorticoid modulatory element-binding protein 1 (GMEB1)
with procaspase-2, -8, or -9 prevents caspase oligomerization and maturation. In 
the present study, we examined the effect of GMEB1 on neuronal apoptosis induced 
by hypoxia and oxidative stress. GMEB1 effectively attenuated caspase activation 
and apoptosis caused by these stresses in human neuroblastoma SK-N-MC cells,
indicating that it functions as a potent inhibitor of caspase activation and
apoptosis in response to oxidative stress. We propose that GMEB1 blocks
pro-apoptosis signals induced by a variety of stresses.

PMID: 18455874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 21;281(16):11397-404. Epub 2006 Feb 23.

Glucocorticoid modulatory element-binding protein 1 binds to initiator
procaspases and inhibits ischemia-induced apoptosis and neuronal injury.

Tsuruma K(1), Nakagawa T, Morimoto N, Minami M, Hara H, Uehara T, Nomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, N12W6, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Caspases are divided into two classes: initiator caspases, which include
caspase-8 and -9 and possess long prodomains, and effector caspases, which
include caspase-3 and -7 and possess short prodomains. Recently, we demonstrated 
that glucocorticoid modulatory element-binding protein 1 (GMEB1) interacts with
the prodomain of procaspase-2, thereby disrupting its autoactivation and the
induction of apoptosis. Here we show that GMEB1 is also capable of binding to
procaspase-8 and -9. GMEB1 attenuated the Fas-mediated activation of these
caspases and the subsequent apoptosis. The knockdown of endogenous GMEB1 using
RNA interference revealed that cells with decreased GMEB1 expression are more
sensitive to stress and undergo accelerated apoptosis. Transgenic mice expressing
a neurospecific GMEB1 had smaller cerebral infarcts and less brain swelling than 
wild-type mice in response to transient focal ischemia. These results suggest
that GMEB1 is an endogenous regulator that selectively binds to initiator
procaspases and inhibits caspase-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 16497673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Dec 24;325(4):1246-51.

Regulation of procaspase-2 by glucocorticoid modulatory element-binding protein 1
through the interaction with caspase recruitment domain.

Tsuruma K(1), Nakagawa T, Shirakura H, Hayashi N, Uehara T, Nomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, N12W6, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Caspases are the primary executioners of apoptosis. Although procaspases believe 
to exist as inactive forms in cells, the detailed regulatory system remains
unclear. Here we show that glucocorticoid modulatory element-binding protein 1
(GMEB1) is capable of binding to the prodomain of caspase-2. We found that this
molecule inhibits the autoproteolytic activation of procaspase-2 by
oligomerization on a chemical compound-dependent system. These findings indicated
that GMEB1 might be an endogenous inhibitory protein that selectively interacts
with prodomain of caspase-2 to disrupt the autoactivation.

PMID: 15555560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Biochemistry. 2004 Jan 13;43(1):245-55.

Structure/activity relationships for GMEB-2: the second member of the
glucocorticoid modulatory element-binding complex.

Chen J(1), He Y, Simons SS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Steroid Hormones Section, NIDDK/LMCB, National Institutes of Health, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, USA.

The position of the dose-response curve of agonist complexes of glucocorticoid
receptors (GRs), and the partial agonist activity of GR-antagonist complexes, can
be modulated by two proteins (GMEB-1 and -2), which bind as oligomers to a DNA
element that is called a glucocorticoid modulatory element, or GME. This element 
is active when located upstream of the glucocorticoid response element that
controls the expression of a reporter gene. Here, we report the
structure/activity relationships of GMEB-2 and compare them to our previous
findings for GMEB-1. Most of the activities of GMEB-2, such as homo- and
heterooligomerization, binding to GR and to CBP, DNA binding, and modulation of
the above GR transcriptional properties, require large regions of the protein.
Only the intrinsic transactivation activity could be localized to a small region 
of the protein. These studies shed light on the mechanism of action of GMEB-2 and
further support our previous conclusion that the ability of factors to modulate
the position of the dose-response curve, and the partial agonist activity, of GR 
complexes is unrelated to effects on the total levels of GR-induced gene
expression. These studies also identify regions of GMEB-2 possessing yet
unidentified properties that are critical for several activities. Finally, as the
domain organization of GMEB-2 and -1 is extremely similar, we conclude that the
quantitative differences in activities derive from variations in amino acid
sequence rather than more global features of protein structure.

PMID: 14705952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Jul;17(7):1283-95. Epub 2003 Apr 17.

Crystal structure and nuclear magnetic resonance analyses of the SAND domain from
glucocorticoid modulatory element binding protein-1 reveals deoxyribonucleic acid
and zinc binding regions.

Surdo PL(1), Bottomley MJ, Sattler M, Scheffzek K.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology
Programme, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

The glucocorticoid-modulatory element-binding proteins, GMEB1 and GMEB2, are
ubiquitous, multifunctional DNA-binding proteins with important roles in the
modulation of transcription upon steroid hormone activation. The GMEB proteins
have intrinsic transactivation ability, but also control the glucocorticoid
response via direct binding to the glucocorticoid receptor. They are also
mandatory host proteins for Parvovirus replication. Here we present the 1.55 A
resolution crystal structure of a central portion of GMEB1, encompassing its SAND
domain, which shares 80% sequence identity with the GMEB2 SAND domain. We
demonstrate that this domain, also present in numerous proteins implicated in
chromatin-associated transcriptional regulation, is necessary and sufficient to
bind the glucocorticoid-modulatory element (GME) DNA target. We use nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) and binding studies to map the DNA recognition surface
to an alpha-helical region exposing the conserved KDWK motif. Using site-directed
mutagenesis, key residues for DNA binding are identified. In contrast to the
previously determined NMR structure of the Sp100b SAND domain, we find that the
GMEB1 SAND domain also comprises a zinc-binding motif. Although the zinc ion is
not necessary for DNA binding, it is found to determine the C-terminal
conformation of the GMEB1 SAND domain. We also show that homologous zinc-binding 
motifs exist in a subset of SAND domain proteins and probe the roles of this
novel motif.

PMID: 12702733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Virol. 2002 Jul;76(13):6518-31.

Parvovirus initiator protein NS1 and RPA coordinate replication fork progression 
in a reconstituted DNA replication system.

Christensen J(1), Tattersall P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Panum Institute, University 
of Copenhagen, Building 24.2, Blegdamsvej 3b, Copenhagen 2200 N, Denmark.
J.Christensen@immi.ku.dk

We show here that the DNA helicase activity of the parvoviral initiator protein
NS1 is highly directional, binding to the single strand at a recessed 5' end and 
displacing the other strand while progressing in a 3'-to-5' direction on the
bound strand. NS1 and a cellular site-specific DNA binding factor, PIF, also
known as glucocorticoid modulating element binding protein, bind to the left-end 
minimal replication origin of minute virus of mice, forming a ternary complex. In
this complex, NS1 is activated to nick one DNA strand, becoming covalently
attached to the 5' end of the nick in the process and providing a 3' OH for
priming DNA synthesis. In this situation, the helicase activity of NS1 did not
displace the nicked strand, but the origin duplex was distorted by the NS1-PIF
complex, as assayed by its sensitivity to KMnO(4) oxidation, and a stretch of
about 14 nucleotides on both strands of the nicked origin underwent limited
unwinding. Addition of Escherichia coli single-stranded DNA binding protein (SSB)
did not lead to further unwinding. However, addition of recombinant human
single-stranded DNA binding protein (RPA) to the initiation reaction catalyzed
extensive unwinding of the nicked origin, suggesting that RPA may be required to 
form a functional replication fork. Accordingly, the unwinding mediated by NS1
and RPA promoted processive leading-strand synthesis catalyzed by recombinant
human DNA polymerase delta, PCNA, and RFC, using the minimal left-end origin
cloned in a plasmid as a template. The requirement for RPA, rather than SSB, in
the unwinding reaction indicated that specific NS1-RPA protein interactions were 
formed. NS1 was tested by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for binding to two-
or three-subunit RPA complexes expressed from recombinant baculoviruses. NS1
efficiently bound each of the baculovirus-expressed complexes, indicating that
the small subunit of RPA is not involved in specific NS1 binding. No NS1
interactions were observed with E. coli SSB or other proteins included as
controls.

PMCID: PMC136255
PMID: 12050365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Mol Biol. 2001 Dec 14;314(5):1029-39.

A consensus DNA recognition motif for two KDWK transcription factors identifies
flexible-length, CpG-methylation sensitive cognate binding sites in the majority 
of human promoters.

Burnett E(1), Christensen J, Tattersall P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA.

Parvovirus initiation factor (PIF), identified in HeLa cells as a host factor
essential for parvoviral DNA replication, is a ubiquitous heterodimeric cellular 
transcription factor. This protein complex was simultaneously identified as
glucocorticoid modulatory element binding protein (GMEB) by its ability to bind
to the glucocorticoid modulating element (GME) upstream of the tyrosine
transaminase promoter. Here, we show that the two PIF/GMEB subunits form
site-specific DNA-binding heterodimers when co-expressed from recombinant
baculoviruses and homodimers when expressed separately. Degenerate
oligonucleotide selection experiments, combined with analysis of dissociation
rates, established that the three complexes bind to flexibly spaced
tetranucleotide half-sites that conform to the consensus ACGPy N(1-9) PuCGPy,
with an optimum of N=6. Binding of all three complexes is extremely sensitive to 
methylation of the cytosine residues in the invariant CpG half-site core,
suggesting a means by which PIF/GMEB binding could be regulated in vivo. Because 
CpG dinucleotides are suppressed in eukaryotic genomes, such binding sites would 
be expected to be very rare. However, analysis of 100 human promoters showed that
over half of them contained at least one site conforming to the consensus, a
significant deviation from the expected random distribution. In many of these,
the binding site is within 100 nucleotides of the transcriptional start site,
indicating that PIF/GMEB may be involved in regulation of these genes.
Oligonucleotides corresponding to five of these sequences, chosen to represent
the range of half-site separations identified by the consensus, were tested for
PIF/GMEB binding by mobility shift assay. All five probes bound the heterodimer
efficiently and, in each case, binding was completely abrogated by 5-methylation 
of the C residues in the CpGs of the putative half-sites.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11743720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Jul;14(7):1010-27.

Properties of the glucocorticoid modulatory element binding proteins GMEB-1 and
-2: potential new modifiers of glucocorticoid receptor transactivation and
members of the family of KDWK proteins.

Kaul S(1), Blackford JA Jr, Chen J, Ogryzko VV, Simons SS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Steroid Hormones Section, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases/Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0805, USA.

An important component of glucocorticoid steroid induction of tyrosine
aminotransferase (TAT) gene expression is the glucocorticoid modulatory element
(GME), which is located at -3.6 kb of the rat TAT gene. The GME both mediates a
greater sensitivity to hormone, due to a left shift in the dose-response curve of
agonists, and increases the partial agonist activity of antiglucocorticoids.
These properties of the GME are intimately related to the binding of a
heteromeric complex of two proteins (GMEB-1 and -2). We previously cloned the rat
GMEB-2 as a 67-kDa protein. We now report the cloning of the other member of the 
GME binding complex, the 88-kDa human GMEB-1, and various properties of both
proteins. GMEB-1 and -2 each possess an intrinsic transactivation activity in
mammalian one-hybrid assays, consistent with our proposed model in which they
modify glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-regulated gene induction. This hypothesis is 
supported by interactions between GR and both GMEB-1 and -2 in mammalian
two-hybrid and in pull-down assays. Furthermore, overexpression of GMEB-1 and -2,
either alone or in combination, results in a reversible right shift in the
dose-response curve, and decreased agonist activity of antisteroids, as expected 
from the squelching of other limiting factors. Additional mechanistic details
that are compatible with the model of GME action are suggested by the
interactions in a two-hybrid assay of both GMEBs with CREB-binding protein (CBP) 
and the absence of histone acetyl transferase (HAT) activity in both proteins.
GMEB-1 and -2 share a sequence of 90 amino acids that is 80% identical. This
region also displays homology to several other proteins containing a core
sequence of KDWK. Thus, the GMEBs may be members of a new family of factors with 
interesting transcriptional properties.

PMID: 10894151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Apr 15;28(8):1819-29.

Genomic organization of human GMEB-1 and rat GMEB-2: structural conservation of
two multifunctional proteins.

Zeng H(1), Kaul S, Simons SS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Steroid Hormones Section, Building 8, Room B2A-07, NIDDK/LMCB, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The glucocorticoid modulatory element binding proteins 1 and 2 (GMEB-1 and
GMEB-2) are of interest both for their multiple activities (e.g. modulation of
transactivation by the glucocorticoid receptor and initiation of parvovirus
replication) and their membership in the emerging family of KDWK proteins. The
genomic sequence of these proteins was desired in order to begin studies on the
control of GMEB expression and to pursue previous evidence for significant
homologies between the GMEBs. We now report the genomic sequence of human GMEB-1 
and rat GMEB-2. The structure of both genes, including portions of the introns,
is highly conserved. However, GMEB-1 and GMEB-2 were found to reside on
chromosomes 1 and 20, respectively, demonstrating that they are encoded by
distinctly different genes. Several isoforms of the GMEBs have been reported or
detected in this study, and the splicing patterns were determined. The tissue
distribution of each GMEB is not the same and is highest in fetal and developing 
tissues, consistent with previous suggestions that both homo- and
hetero-oligomers may possess biological activity. The promoter region of both
genes has been identified and both display high levels of transcription activity 
in transiently transfected cells when fused upstream of a promoterless reporter. 
These results indicate that the GMEBs are proteins that evolved from a single
parent gene, have been highly conserved since the divergence of rats and humans
and probably play important roles in development and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC102812
PMID: 10734202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. FEBS Lett. 2000 Feb 25;468(2-3):203-10.

Cloning of a mouse glucocorticoid modulatory element binding protein, a new
member of the KDWK family.

Jimenez-Lara AM(1), Heine MJ, Gronemeyer H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, P.O. Box 163, 67404, Illkirch, France.

A mouse cDNA that encodes a nuclear DNA binding protein was identified by yeast
two-hybrid screening using the activation domain 2 of the nuclear receptor
coactivator TIF2 as a bait. BLAST analysis revealed that the identified cDNA
encodes a KDWK domain and contains sequences almost identical to three tryptic
peptides of rat GMEB-1 which together with the GMEB-2 heterodimeric partner binds
to the GME/CRE sequence (glucocorticoid modulatory element) of the tyrosine
aminotransferase (TAT) promoter. Mouse GMEB-1 is ubiquitously expressed in all
the tissues examined. In vitro translated mGMEB-1 bound specifically to GME
oligonucleotides, either alone or as a heterodimer with rGMEB-2. Transient
transfection experiments with TAT promoter reporter genes suggest a potential
role for mGMEB-1 as a transcriptional regulator of the TAT promoter.

PMID: 10692587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. FEBS Lett. 1999 Jun 11;452(3):170-6.

Cloning and characterization of hGMEB1, a novel glucocorticoid modulatory element
binding protein.

Thériault JR(1), Charette SJ, Lambert H, Landry J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, L'Hôtel-Dieu de
Québec, Que., Canada.

A 21-bp element called glucocorticoid modulatory element (GME) modulates the
glucocorticoid receptor-mediated responses via the binding of an as yet poorly
characterized transacting complex of proteins containing the 88-kDa GMEB1 and the
67-kDa GMEB2. Using heat shock protein 27 (HSP27) as bait in the yeast two-hybrid
assay, we cloned a 1.83-kb cDNA encoding a novel 573-amino acid protein called
human GMEB1 (hGMEB1). hGMEB1 possesses a KDWK domain, contains sequences almost
identical (36/38) to three tryptic peptides of rat GMEB1 and shares 38% identity 
with rat GMEB2. hGMEB1 is ubiquitously expressed as a 85-kDa protein in all cell 
lines and tissues examined. In vitro translated hGMEB1 bound specifically to GME 
oligonucleotides yielding a complex of similar size to the complex obtained using
rat liver nuclear extracts. Both complexes were supershifted with an antibody
specific to hGMEB1. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed the in vivo
interaction of HSP27 with hGMEB1.

PMID: 10386584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1998 Jul;151(1):143-51.

Requirement for cooperative interaction of interleukin-6 responsive element type 
2 and glucocorticoid responsive element in the synergistic activation of mouse
metallothionein-I gene by interleukin-6 and glucocorticoid.

Kasutani K(1), Itoh N, Kanekiyo M, Muto N, Tanaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Yamada-oka, Suita,
Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

Metallothionein (MT)-inducing activity of interleukin (IL)-6 depends on the
presence of glucocorticoid in hepatic cells. The synergistic action of IL-6 and
glucocorticoid was observed in the transcriptional activation of the mouse MT
(mMT)-I gene. We found that a 281-bp promoter was sufficient for IL-6 and
glucocorticoid stimulation. Our inspection of this region revealed the putative
type 1 and 2 IL-6 responsive elements (REs). Functional analyses of these regions
were performed using luciferase reporter constructs, and it was observed that the
type 2 IL-6RE exerted the major response to the IL-6 signal. The transcriptional 
factor binding to type 1 IL-6RE, nuclear factor-IL-6, hardly contributed to the
activation of the mMT-I promoter by IL-6 and glucocorticoid. A glucocorticoid
responsive element (GRE) was also required for the synergistic activation by IL-6
and glucocorticoid. Interestingly, this synergism was not observed when the type 
2 IL-6RE and the GRE were kept apart. Therefore, the synergistic activation of
the mMT-I gene by IL-6 and glucocorticoid may require not only that signal
transducers and activators 3 (Stat3) and the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) bind to
their respective responsive elements, but also that Stat3 and the GR physically
interact with one another.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9705897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 15;270(37):21893-901.

The factor binding to the glucocorticoid modulatory element of the tyrosine
aminotransferase gene is a novel and ubiquitous heteromeric complex.

Oshima H(1), Szapary D, Simons SS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Steroid Hormones Section, NIDDK/Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Glucocorticoid induction of the tyrosine aminotransferase gene deviates from that
of many glucocorticoid-responsive genes by having a lower EC50 and displaying
more agonist activity with a given antiglucocorticoid. A cis-acting element,
located 3646 base pairs upstream of the start of tyrosine aminotransferase gene
transcription, has been found to be sufficient to reproduce these variations with
heterologous genes and promoters (Oshima, H., and Simons, S.S., Jr. (1992) Mol.
Endocrinol. 6, 416-428). This element has been called a glucocorticoid modulatory
element, or GME. Others have called this sequence a cyclic AMP-responsive element
(CRE) due to the binding of the cyclic AMP response element binding protein
(CREB). We now report the partial purification and characterization of two new
proteins (GMEB1 and -2) of 88 and 67 kDa that bind to the GME/CRE as a
heteromeric complex. This purification was followed by the formation of a
previously characterized, biologically relevant band in gel shift assays. By
several biochemical criteria, the GMEBs differed from many of the previously
described CREB/CREM/ATF family members. Partial peptide sequencing revealed that 
the sequences of these two proteins have not yet been described. Size exclusion
chromatography and molecular weight measurements of the gel-shifted band
demonstrated that the GMEBs bound to the GME as a macromolecular complex of about
550 kDa that could be dissociated by deoxycholate. Similar experiments showed
that CREB bound to the GME as heteromeric complexes of about 310 and 360 kDa. As 
determined from gel shift assays, GMEB1 and -2 are not restricted to rat liver
cells but appear to be ubiquitous. Thus, these novel GMEBs may participate in a
similar modulation of other glucocorticoid-inducible genes in a variety of cells.

PMID: 7665613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


