
1. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 26;11(2):e0149711. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149711.
eCollection 2016.

Identification of Sex and Female's Reproductive Stage in Commercial Fish Species 
through the Quantification of Ribosomal Transcripts in Gonads.

Rojo-Bartolomé I(1), Diaz de Cerio O(1), Diez G(2), Cancio I(1).

Author information: 
(1)CBET Research Group, Dept. of Zoology and Animal Cell Biology, Research Centre
for Experimental Marine Biology and Biotechnology of Plentzia (PIE-UPV/EHU),
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Areatza, z/g E-48620, Plentzia,
Basque Country. (2)AZTI, Marine Research Division, Txatxarramendi, s/n E-48395,
Sukarrieta, Bizkaia, Basque Country.

The estimation of maturity and sex of fish stocks in European waters is a
requirement of the EU Data Collection Framework as part of the policy to improve 
fisheries management. On the other hand, research on fish biology is increasingly
focused in molecular approaches, researchers needing correct identification of
fish sex and reproductive stage without necessarily having in house the
histological know-how necessary for the task. Taking advantage of the
differential gene transcription occurring during fish sex differentiation and
gametogenesis, the utility of 5S ribosomal RNA (5S rRNA) and General
transcription factor IIIA (gtf3a) in the molecular identification of sex and
gametogenic stage was tested in different economically-relevant fish species from
the Bay of Biscay. Gonads of 9 fish species (, Atlantic, Atlantic-chub and horse 
mackerel, blue whiting, bogue, European anchovy, hake and pilchard and megrim),
collected from local commercial fishing vessels were histologically sexed and 5S 
and 18S rRNA concentrations were quantified by capillary electrophoresis to
calculate a 5S/18S rRNA index. Degenerate primers permitted cloning and
sequencing of gtf3a fragments in 7 of the studied species. 5S rRNA and gtf3a
transcript levels, together with 5S/18S rRNA index, distinguished clearly ovaries
from testis in all of the studied species. The values were always higher in
females than in males. 5S/18S rRNA index values in females were always highest
when fish were captured in early phases of ovary development whilst, in later
vitellogenic stages, the values decreased significantly. In megrim and European
anchovy, where gonads in different oogenesis stages were obtained, the 5S/18S
rRNA index identified clearly gametogenic stage. This approach, to the sexing and
the quantitative non-subjective identification of the maturity stage of female
fish, could have multiple applications in the study of fish stock dynamics, fish 
reproduction and fecundity and fish biology in general.

PMCID: PMC4771027
PMID: 26918444  [PubMed - in process]


2. Ann Hum Genet. 2016 Jan;80(1):38-49. doi: 10.1111/ahg.12135. Epub 2015 Oct 16.

Practical Experience of the Application of a Weighted Burden Test to Whole Exome 
Sequence Data for Obesity and Schizophrenia.

Curtis D(1); UK10K Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)UCL Genetics Institute, UCL, Darwin Building, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, 
UK.

For biological and statistical reasons it makes sense to combine information from
variants at the level of the gene. One may wish to give more weight to variants
which are rare and those that are more likely to affect function. A combined
weighting scheme, implemented in the SCOREASSOC program, was applied to whole
exome sequence data for 1392 subjects with schizophrenia and 982 with obesity
from the UK10K project. Results conformed fairly well with null hypothesis
expectations and no individual gene was strongly implicated. However, a number of
the higher ranked genes appear plausible candidates as being involved in one or
other phenotype and may warrant further investigation. These include MC4R, NLGN2,
CRP, DONSON, GTF3A, IL36B, ADCYAP1R1, ARSA, DLG1, SIK2, SLAIN1, UBE2Q2, ZNF507,
CRHR1, MUSK, NSF, SNORD115, GDF3 and HIBADH. Some individual variants in these
genes have different frequencies between cohorts and could be genotyped in
additional subjects. For other genes, there is a general excess of variants at
many different sites so attempts at replication would be more difficult. Overall,
the weighted burden test provides a convenient method for using sequence data to 
highlight genes of interest.

© 2015 The Authors. Annals of Human Genetics published by University College
London (UCL) and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26474449  [PubMed - in process]


3. Diabetologia. 2008 Jan;51(1):155-64. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Fat depot-related differences in gene expression, adiponectin secretion, and
insulin action and signalling in human adipocytes differentiated in vitro from
precursor stromal cells.

Perrini S(1), Laviola L, Cignarelli A, Melchiorre M, De Stefano F, Caccioppoli C,
Natalicchio A, Orlando MR, Garruti G, De Fazio M, Catalano G, Memeo V, Giorgino
R, Giorgino F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, Section of Internal
Medicine, Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, University of Bari School of
Medicine, Bari, Italy.

AIM/HYPOTHESIS: The distinct metabolic properties of visceral and subcutaneous
adipocytes may be due to inherent characteristics of the cells that are resident 
in each fat depot. To test this hypothesis, human adipocytes were differentiated 
in vitro from precursor stromal cells obtained from visceral and subcutaneous fat
depots and analysed for genetic, biochemical and metabolic endpoints.
METHODS: Stromal cells were isolated from adipose tissue depots of nondiabetic
individuals. mRNA levels of adipocyte-specific proteins were determined by
real-time RT-PCR. Insulin signalling was evaluated by immunoblotting with
specific antibodies. Glucose transport was measured by a 2-deoxy-glucose uptake
assay. Adiponectin secretion in the adipocyte-conditioned medium was determined
by a specific RIA.
RESULTS: With cell differentiation, mRNA levels of PPARG, C/EBPalpha (also known 
as CEBPA), AP2 (also known as GTF3A), GLUT4 (also known as SLC2A4) were markedly 
upregulated, whereas GLUT1 (also known as SLC2A1) mRNA did not change. However,
expression of C/EBPalpha, AP2 and adiponectin was higher in subcutaneous than in 
visceral adipocytes. By contrast, adiponectin was secreted at threefold higher
rates by visceral than by subcutaneous adipocytes while visceral adipocytes also 
showed two- to threefold higher insulin-stimulated glucose uptake.
Insulin-induced phosphorylation of the insulin receptor, IRS proteins, Akt and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2 was more rapid and tended to decrease
at earlier time-points in visceral than in subcutaneous adipocytes.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Subcutaneous and visceral adipocytes, also when
differentiated in vitro from precursor stromal cells, retain differences in gene 
expression, adiponectin secretion, and insulin action and signalling. Thus, the
precursor cells that reside in the visceral and subcutaneous fat depots may
already possess inherent and specific metabolic characteristics that will be
expressed upon completion of the differentiation programme.

PMID: 17960360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Croat Med J. 2005 Aug;46(4):647-56.

Gene expression profile of human Down syndrome leukocytes.

Malagó W Jr(1), Sommer CA, Del Cistia Andrade C, Soares-Costa A, Abrao Possik P, 
Cassago A, Santejo Silveira HC, Henrique-Silva F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Evolution, Federal University of Sao Carlos,
Rodovia Washington Luis, Km 235, CEP 13565-905, Sao Carlos, SP, Brazil.

AIM: Identification of differences in the gene expression patterns of Down
syndrome and normal leukocytes.
METHODS: We constructed the first Down syndrome leukocyte serial analysis of gene
expression (SAGE) library from a 28 year-old patient. This library was analyzed
and compared with a normal leukocyte SAGE library using the eSAGE software.
Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to validate the
results.
RESULTS: We found that a large number of unidentified transcripts were
overexpressed in Down syndrome leukocytes and some transcripts coding for growth 
factors (e.g. interleukin 8, IL-8), ribosomaproteins (e.g. L13a, L29, and L37),
and transcription factors (e.g., Jun B, Jun D, and C/EBP beta) were
underexpressed. The SAGE data were successfully validated for the genes IL-8,
CXCR4, BCL2A1, L13a, L29, L37, and GTF3A using RT-PCR.
CONCLUSION: Our analysis identified significant changes in the expression pattern
of Down syndrome leukocytes compared with normal ones, including key regulators
of growth and proliferation, ribosomal proteins, and a large number of
overexpressed transcripts that were not matched in UniGene clusters and that may 
represent novel genes related to Down syndrome. This study offers a new insight
into transcriptional changes in Down syndrome leukocytes and indicates candidate 
genes for further investigations into the molecular mechanism of Down syndrome
pathology.

PMID: 16100769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1995;70(3-4):235-8.

Molecular cloning, characterization, and chromosomal mapping of a novel human
gene (GTF3A) that is highly homologous to Xenopus transcription factor IIIA.

Arakawa H(1), Nagase H, Hayashi N, Ogawa M, Nagata M, Fujiwara T, Takahashi E,
Shin S, Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cancer Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

We have isolated a novel human cDNA that is highly related to Xenopus
transcription factor IIIA (TFIIIA). This clone contains an open reading frame of 
1,269 nucleotides encoding 423 amino acids, including nine repeats of the
Cys2His2-type of zinc-finger domain. A comparison of its sequence with Xenopus
TFIIIA revealed 63% identity in nucleic acids and 58% identity in amino acids
over a large portion of the gene and predicted peptide, indicating that the human
homologue is likely to function as a transcription factor. The zinc-finger
domains of the predicted protein also showed homology with those of human genes
such as WT1, transcriptional repressor YY1, and MYC-associated zinc-finger
protein (MAZ). Northern analysis showed expression in various tissues examined.
The human TFIIIA gene (GTF3A) was localized to chromosome band 13q12.3-->q13.1 by
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH).

PMID: 7789179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


