
1. Epigenetics. 2015;10(5):431-45. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1039216.

Selective inhibition of esophageal cancer cells by combination of HDAC inhibitors
and Azacytidine.

Ahrens TD(1), Timme S, Hoeppner J, Ostendorp J, Hembach S, Follo M, Hopt UT,
Werner M, Busch H, Boerries M, Lassmann S.

Author information: 
(1)a Dept. of Pathology; University Medical Center ; Freiburg , Germany.

Esophageal cancers are highly aggressive tumors with poor prognosis despite some 
recent advances in surgical and radiochemotherapy treatment options. This study
addressed the feasibility of drugs targeting epigenetic modifiers in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) cells. We
tested inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs) by SAHA, MS-275, and FK228,
inhibition of DNA methyltransferases by Azacytidine (AZA) and Decitabine (DAC),
and the effect of combination treatment using both types of drugs. The drug
targets, HDAC1/2/3 and DNMT1, were expressed in normal esophageal epithelium and 
tumor cells of ESCC or EAC tissue specimens, as well as in non-neoplastic
esophageal epithelial (Het-1A), ESCC (OE21, Kyse-270, Kyse-410), and EAC (OE33,
SK-GT-4) cell lines. In vitro, HDAC activity, histone acetylation, and p21
expression were similarly affected in non-neoplastic, ESCC, and EAC cell lines
post inhibitor treatment. Combined MS-275/AZA treatment, however, selectively
targeted esophageal cancer cell lines by inducing DNA damage, cell viability
loss, and apoptosis, and by decreasing cell migration. Non-neoplastic Het-1A
cells were protected against HDACi (MS-275)/AZA treatment. RNA transcriptome
analyses post MS-275 and/or AZA treatment identified novel regulated candidate
genes (up: BCL6, Hes2; down: FAIM, MLKL), which were specifically associated with
the treatment responses of esophageal cancer cells. In summary, combined
HDACi/AZA treatment is efficient and selective for the targeting of esophageal
cancer cells, despite similar target expression of normal and esophageal cancer
epithelium, in vitro and in human esophageal carcinomas. The precise mechanisms
of action of treatment responses involve novel candidate genes regulated by
HDACi/AZA in esophageal cancer cells. Together, targeting of epigenetic modifiers
in esophageal cancers may represent a potential future therapeutic approach.

PMCID: PMC4623041 [Available on 2016-04-29]
PMID: 25923331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Clin Invest. 2015 Mar 2;125(3):1243-54. doi: 10.1172/JCI79328. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Vascular niche promotes hematopoietic multipotent progenitor formation from
pluripotent stem cells.

Gori JL, Butler JM, Chan YY, Chandrasekaran D, Poulos MG, Ginsberg M, Nolan DJ,
Elemento O, Wood BL, Adair JE, Rafii S, Kiem HP.

Pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) represent an alternative hematopoietic stem cell
(HSC) source for treating hematopoietic disease. The limited engraftment of human
PSC-derived (hPSC-derived) multipotent progenitor cells (MPP) has hampered the
clinical application of these cells and suggests that MPP require additional cues
for definitive hematopoiesis. We hypothesized that the presence of a vascular
niche that produces Notch ligands jagged-1 (JAG1) and delta-like ligand-4 (DLL4) 
drives definitive hematopoiesis. We differentiated hes2 human embryonic stem
cells (hESC) and Macaca nemestrina-induced PSC (iPSC) line-7 with cytokines in
the presence or absence of endothelial cells (ECs) that express JAG1 and DLL4.
Cells cocultured with ECs generated substantially more CD34+CD45+ hematopoietic
progenitors compared with cells cocultured without ECs or with ECs lacking JAG1
or DLL4. EC-induced cells exhibited Notch activation and expressed HSC-specific
Notch targets RUNX1 and GATA2. EC-induced PSC-MPP engrafted at a markedly higher 
level in NOD/SCID/IL-2 receptor <U+03B3> chain-null (NSG) mice compared with
cytokine-induced cells, and low-dose chemotherapy-based selection further
increased engraftment. Long-term engraftment and the myeloid-to-lymphoid ratio
achieved with vascular niche induction were similar to levels achieved for cord
blood-derived MPP and up to 20-fold higher than those achieved with hPSC-derived 
MPP engraftment. Our findings indicate that endothelial Notch ligands promote
PSC-definitive hematopoiesis and production of long-term engrafting CD34+ cells, 
suggesting these ligands are critical for HSC emergence.

PMCID: PMC4362238
PMID: 25664855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2015 Feb;8(1):193-202. doi:
10.1161/CIRCEP.114.002049. Epub 2014 Dec 10.

Phospholamban as a crucial determinant of the inotropic response of human
pluripotent stem cell-derived ventricular cardiomyocytes and engineered
3-dimensional tissue constructs.

Chen G(1), Li S(1), Karakikes I(1), Ren L(1), Chow MZ(1), Chopra A(1), Keung
W(1), Yan B(1), Chan CW(1), Costa KD(1), Kong CW(1), Hajjar RJ(1), Chen CS(1), Li
RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Cardiovascular Research Center, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, Manhattan, NY (G.C., I.K., K.D.C., R.J.H., R.A.L.); Department of
Physiology (G.C., S.L., L.R., M.Z.-Y.C., W.K., C.-W.K., R.A.L.), Stem Cell and
Regenerative Medicine Consortium (G.C., S.L., L.R., M.Z.-Y.C., W.K., B.Y.,
C.W.Y.C., C.-W.K., R.A.L.), Department of Anatomy (C.W.Y.C.), LKS Faculty of
Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong; Department of
Bioengineering, Boston University, MA (A.C., C.S.C.); Harvard Wyss Institute for 
Biologically Inspired Engineering, Boston, MA (A.C., C.S.C.); and Department of
Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong (B.Y.). (2)From the
Cardiovascular Research Center, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
Manhattan, NY (G.C., I.K., K.D.C., R.J.H., R.A.L.); Department of Physiology
(G.C., S.L., L.R., M.Z.-Y.C., W.K., C.-W.K., R.A.L.), Stem Cell and Regenerative 
Medicine Consortium (G.C., S.L., L.R., M.Z.-Y.C., W.K., B.Y., C.W.Y.C., C.-W.K., 
R.A.L.), Department of Anatomy (C.W.Y.C.), LKS Faculty of Medicine, University of
Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong; Department of Bioengineering, Boston University, 
MA (A.C., C.S.C.); Harvard Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, 
Boston, MA (A.C., C.S.C.); and Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist
University, Hong Kong (B.Y.). ronaldli@hku.hk.

BACKGROUND: Human (h) embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) serve as a potential unlimited ex vivo source of cardiomyocytes
(CMs). However, a well-accepted roadblock has been their immature phenotype.
hESC/iPSC-derived ventricular (v) CMs and their engineered cardiac microtissues
(hvCMTs) similarly displayed positive chronotropic but null inotropic responses
to ß-adrenergic stimulation. Given that phospholamban (PLB) is robustly present
in adult but poorly expressed in hESC/iPSC-vCMs and its defined biological role
in ß-adrenergic signaling, we investigated the functional consequences of PLB
expression in hESC/iPSC-vCMs and hvCMTs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: First, we confirmed that PLB protein was differentially
expressed in hESC (HES2, H9)- and iPSC-derived and adult vCMs. We then transduced
hES2-vCMs with the recombinant adenoviruses (Ad) Ad-PLB or Ad-S16E-PLB to
overexpress wild-type PLB or the pseudophosphorylated point-mutated variant,
respectively. As anticipated from the inhibitory effect of unphosphorylated PLB
on sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase, Ad-PLB transduction significantly
attenuated electrically evoked Ca2+ transient amplitude and prolonged the 50%
decay time. Importantly, Ad-PLB-transduced hES2-vCMs uniquely responded to
isoproterenol. Ad-S16E-PLB-transduced hES2-vCMs displayed an intermediate
phenotype. The same trends were observed with H9- and iPSC-vCMs. Directionally,
similar results were also seen with Ad-PLB-transduced and Ad-S16E-transduced
hvCMTs. However, Ad-PLB altered neither the global transcriptome nor ICa,L,
implicating a PLB-specific effect.
CONCLUSIONS: Engineered upregulation of PLB expression in hESC/iPSC-vCMs restores
a positive inotropic response to ß-adrenergic stimulation. These results not only
provide a better mechanistic understanding of the immaturity of hESC/iPSC-vCMs
but will also lead to improved disease models and transplantable prototypes with 
adult-like physiological responses.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25504561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;110:263-83. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405943-6.00007-5.

Expression dynamics and functions of Hes factors in development and diseases.

Kobayashi T(1), Kageyama R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan; Japan Science
and Technology Agency, Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology
(CREST), Saitama, Japan. Electronic address: tkobayas@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(2)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan; Japan Science
and Technology Agency, Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology
(CREST), Saitama, Japan; World Premier International Research
Initiative-Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan. Electronic address: rkageyam@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Hes genes, encoding basic helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcriptional repressors, are 
mammalian homologues of Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split genes, both of
which are required for normal neurogenesis in Drosophila. There are seven members
in the human Hes family, Hes1-7, which are expressed in many tissues and play
various roles mainly in development. All Hes proteins have three conserved
domains: basic HLH (bHLH), Orange, and WRPW domains. The basic region binds to
target DNA sequences, while the HLH region forms homo- and heterodimers with
other bHLH proteins, the Orange domain is responsible for the selection of
partners during heterodimer formation, and the WRPW domain recruits corepressors.
Hes1, Hes5, and Hes7 are known as downstream effectors of canonical Notch
signaling, which regulates cell differentiation via cell-cell interaction. Hes
factors regulate many events in development by repressing the expression of
target genes, many of which encode transcriptional activators that promote cell
differentiation. For example, Hes1, Hes3, and Hes5 are highly expressed by neural
stem cells, and inactivation of these genes results in insufficient maintenance
of stem cell proliferation and prematurely promotes neuronal differentiation.
Recently, it was shown that the expression dynamics of Hes1 plays crucial roles
in proper developmental timings and fate-determination steps of embryonic stem
cells and neural progenitor cells. Here, we discuss some key features of Hes
factors in development and diseases.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2014 Apr 3. doi: 10.1071/RD13399. [Epub ahead of print]

Differential expression of Notch component and effector genes during ovarian
follicle and corpus luteum development during the oestrous cycle.

Murta D, Batista M, Silva E, Trindade A, Mateus L, Duarte A, Lopes-da-Costa L.

Ovarian dynamics throughout the female oestrous cycle (EC) are characterised by
cyclical follicle and corpus luteum (CL) development. These events are tightly
regulated, involving extensive cell-to-cell communication. Notch is an
evolutionarily well conserved cell-signalling pathway implicated in cell-fate
decisions in several tissues. Here, we evaluated the extra-vascular expression
patterns of Notch component and effector genes during follicle and CL development
throughout the EC. Five mature CD1 female mice were killed at each EC stage.
Blood samples were collected for progesterone measurement, ovaries were processed
for immunohistochemistry and expression patterns of Notch components (Notch1, 2
and 3, Jagged1 and Delta-like1 and 4) and effectors (Hes1, Hes2 and Hes5) were
characterised. Nuclear detection of Notch effectors indicates that Notch
signalling is active in the ovary. Notch components and effectors are
differentially expressed during follicle and CL development throughout the EC.
The spatial and temporal specific expression patterns are associated with
follicle growth, selection and ovulation or atresia and CL development and
regression.

PMID: 24695060  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jul 15;23(14):1704-16. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0509. Epub 2014
Apr 22.

A simple, cost-effective but highly efficient system for deriving ventricular
cardiomyocytes from human pluripotent stem cells.

Weng Z(1), Kong CW, Ren L, Karakikes I, Geng L, He J, Chow MZ, Mok CF, Keung W,
Chow H, Leung AY, Hajjar RJ, Li RA, Chan CW.

Author information: 
(1)1 Stem Cell & Regenerative Medicine Consortium, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Hong Kong , Pokfulam, Hong Kong .

Self-renewable human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) serve as a potential
unlimited ex vivo source of human cardiomyocytes (CMs) for cell-based disease
modeling and therapies. Although recent advances in directed differentiation
protocols have enabled more efficient derivation of hPSC-derived CMs with an
efficiency of ~50%-80% CMs and a final yield of ~1-20 CMs per starting
undifferentiated hPSC, these protocols are often not readily transferrable across
lines without first optimizing multiple parameters. Further, the resultant
populations are undefined for chamber specificity or heterogeneous containing
mixtures of atrial, ventricular (V), and pacemaker derivatives. Here we report a 
highly cost-effective and reproducibly efficient system for deriving
hPSC-ventricular cardiomyocytes (VCMs) from all five human embryonic stem cell
(HES2, H7, and H9) and human induced PSC (hiPSC) (reprogrammed from human adult
peripheral blood CD34(+) cells using nonintegrating episomal vectors) lines
tested. Cardiogenic embryoid bodies could be formed by the sequential addition of
BMP4, Rho kinase inhibitor, activin-A, and IWR-1. Spontaneously contracting
clusters appeared as early as day 8. At day 16, up to 95% of cells were cTnT(+). 
Of which, 93%, 94%, 100%, 92%, and 92% of cardiac derivatives from HES2, H7, H9, 
and two iPSC lines, respectively, were VCMs as gauged by signature ventricular
action potential and ionic currents (INa(+)/ICa,L(+)/IKr(+)/IKATP(+)); Ca(2+)
transients showed positive chronotropic responses to ß-adrenergic stimulation.
Our simple, cost-effective protocol required the least amounts of reagents and
time compared with others. While the purity and percentage of PSC-VCMs were
comparable to a recently published protocol, the present yield and efficiency
with a final output of up to 70 hPSC-VCMs per hPSC was up to 5-fold higher and
without the need of performing line-specific optimization. These differences were
discussed. The results may lead to mass production of hPSC-VCMs in bioreactors.

PMCID: PMC4086679
PMID: 24564569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cancer Med. 2013 Oct;2(5):734-43. doi: 10.1002/cam4.118. Epub 2013 Sep 17.

Thiocoraline alters neuroendocrine phenotype and activates the Notch pathway in
MTC-TT cell line.

Tesfazghi S(1), Eide J, Dammalapati A, Korlesky C, Wyche TP, Bugni TS, Chen H,
Jaskula-Sztul R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison, Wisconsin.

Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) is an aggressive neuroendocrine tumor (NET).
Previous research has shown that activation of Notch signaling has a tumor
suppressor role in NETs. The potential therapeutic effect of thiocoraline on the 
activation of the Notch pathway in an MTC cell line (TT) was investigated.
Thiocoraline was isolated from a marine bacterium Verrucosispora sp. MTT assay
(3-[4, 5-dimethylthiazole-2-yl]-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) was used to
determine the IC50 value and to measure cell proliferation. Western blot revealed
the expression of Notch isoforms, NET, and cell cycle markers. Cell cycle
progression was validated by flow cytometry. The mRNA expression of Notch
isoforms and downstream targets were measured using real-time PCR. The IC50 value
for thiocoraline treatment in TT cells was determined to be 7.6 nmol/L.
Thiocoraline treatment decreased cell proliferation in a dose- and time-dependent
manner. The mechanism of growth inhibition was found to be cell cycle arrest in
G1 phase. Thiocoraline activated the Notch pathway as demonstrated by the
dose-dependent increase in mRNA and protein expression of Notch isoforms.
Furthermore, treatment with thiocoraline resulted in changes in the expression of
downstream targets of the Notch pathway (HES1, HES2, HES6, HEY1, and HEY2) and
reduced expression of NET markers, CgA, and ASCL1. Thiocoraline is a potent Notch
pathway activator and an inhibitor of MTC-TT cell proliferation at low nanomolar 
concentrations. These results provide exciting evidence for the use of
thiocoraline as a potential treatment for intractable MTC.

© 2013 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3892805
PMID: 24403239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 28;8(8):e72767. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072767. eCollection
2013.

Dynamics of Notch pathway expression during mouse testis post-natal development
and along the spermatogenic cycle.

Murta D(1), Batista M, Silva E, Trindade A, Henrique D, Duarte A, Lopes-da-Costa 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction and Obstetrics, CIISA, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Technical 
University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.

The transcription and expression patterns of Notch pathway components (Notch 1-3,
Delta1 and 4, Jagged1) and effectors (Hes1, Hes2, Hes5 and Nrarp) were evaluated 
(through RT-PCR and IHC) in the mouse testis at key moments of post-natal
development, and along the adult spermatogenic cycle. Notch pathway components
and effectors are transcribed in the testis and expressed in germ, Sertoli and
Leydig cells, and each Notch component shows a specific cell-type and time-window
expression pattern. This expression at key testis developmental events prompt for
a role of Notch signaling in pre-pubertal spermatogonia quiescence, onset of
spermatogenesis, and regulation of the spermatogenic cycle.

PMCID: PMC3755970
PMID: 24015274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2013 Jun 7;6(1):17. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-6-17.

A novel methyl-binding domain protein enrichment method for identifying
genome-wide tissue-specific DNA methylation from nanogram DNA samples.

Oliver VF(1), Wan J, Agarwal S, Zack DJ, Qian J, Merbs SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 600 
North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. smerbs@jhmi.edu.

BACKGROUND: Growing evidence suggests that DNA methylation plays a role in
tissue-specific differentiation. Current approaches to methylome analysis using
enrichment with the methyl-binding domain protein (MBD) are restricted to large
(=1 µg) DNA samples, limiting the analysis of small tissue samples. Here we
present a technique that enables characterization of genome-wide tissue-specific 
methylation patterns from nanogram quantities of DNA.
RESULTS: We have developed a methodology utilizing MBD2b/MBD3L1 enrichment for
methylated DNA, kinase pre-treated ligation-mediated PCR amplification (MeKL) and
hybridization to the comprehensive high-throughput array for relative methylation
(CHARM) customized tiling arrays, which we termed MeKL-chip. Kinase modification 
in combination with the addition of PEG has increased ligation-mediated PCR
amplification over 20-fold, enabling >400-fold amplification of starting DNA. We 
have shown that MeKL-chip can be applied to as little as 20 ng of DNA, enabling
comprehensive analysis of small DNA samples. Applying MeKL-chip to the mouse
retina (a limited tissue source) and brain, 2,498 tissue-specific differentially 
methylated regions (T-DMRs) were characterized. The top five T-DMRs (Rgs20, Hes2,
Nfic, Cckbr and Six3os1) were validated by pyrosequencing.
CONCLUSIONS: MeKL-chip enables genome-wide methylation analysis of nanogram
quantities of DNA with a wide range of observed-to-expected CpG ratios due to the
binding properties of the MBD2b/MBD3L1 protein complex. This methodology enabled 
the first analysis of genome-wide methylation in the mouse retina, characterizing
novel T-DMRs.

PMCID: PMC3680319
PMID: 23759032  [PubMed]


10. Biomaterials. 2013 Jul;34(23):5813-20. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.04.026.
Epub 2013 May 2.

Tissue-engineered cardiac patch for advanced functional maturation of human
ESC-derived cardiomyocytes.

Zhang D(1), Shadrin IY, Lam J, Xian HQ, Snodgrass HR, Bursac N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA.

Human embryonic stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hESC-CMs) provide a promising
source for cell therapy and drug screening. Several high-yield protocols exist
for hESC-CM production; however, methods to significantly advance hESC-CM
maturation are still lacking. Building on our previous experience with mouse
ESC-CMs, we investigated the effects of 3-dimensional (3D) tissue-engineered
culture environment and cardiomyocyte purity on structural and functional
maturation of hESC-CMs. 2D monolayer and 3D fibrin-based cardiac patch cultures
were generated using dissociated cells from differentiated Hes2 embryoid bodies
containing varying percentage (48-90%) of CD172a (SIRPA)-positive cardiomyocytes.
hESC-CMs within the patch were aligned uniformly by locally controlling the
direction of passive tension. Compared to hESC-CMs in age (2 weeks) and purity
(48-65%) matched 2D monolayers, hESC-CMs in 3D patches exhibited significantly
higher conduction velocities (CVs), longer sarcomeres (2.09 ± 0.02 vs.
1.77 ± 0.01 µm), and enhanced expression of genes involved in cardiac contractile
function, including cTnT, aMHC, CASQ2 and SERCA2. The CVs in cardiac patches
increased with cardiomyocyte purity, reaching 25.1 cm/s in patches constructed
with 90% hESC-CMs. Maximum contractile force amplitudes and active stresses of
cardiac patches averaged to 3.0 ± 1.1 mN and 11.8 ± 4.5 mN/mm(2), respectively.
Moreover, contractile force per input cardiomyocyte averaged to 5.7 ± 1.1 nN/cell
and showed a negative correlation with hESC-CM purity. Finally, patches exhibited
significant positive inotropy with isoproterenol administration (1.7 ± 0.3-fold
force increase, EC50 = 95.1 nm). These results demonstrate highly advanced levels
of hESC-CM maturation after 2 weeks of 3D cardiac patch culture and carry
important implications for future drug development and cell therapy studies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3660435
PMID: 23642535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 26;8(4):e61807. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061807. Print 2013.

Epigenetic inactivation of Notch-Hes pathway in human B-cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia.

Kuang SQ(1), Fang Z, Zweidler-McKay PA, Yang H, Wei Y, Gonzalez-Cervantes EA,
Boumber Y, Garcia-Manero G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

The Notch pathway can have both oncogenic and tumor suppressor roles, depending
on cell context. For example, Notch signaling promotes T cell differentiation and
is leukemogenic in T cells, whereas it inhibits early B cell differentiation and 
acts as a tumor suppressor in B cell leukemia where it induces growth arrest and 
apoptosis. The regulatory mechanisms that contribute to these opposing roles are 
not understood. Aberrant promoter DNA methylation and histone modifications are
associated with silencing of tumor suppressor genes and have been implicated in
leukemogenesis. Using methylated CpG island amplification (MCA)/DNA promoter
microarray, we identified Notch3 and Hes5 as hypermethylated in human B cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). We investigated the methylation status of
other Notch pathway genes by bisulfite pyrosequencing. Notch3, JAG1, Hes2, Hes4
and Hes5 were frequently hypermethylated in B leukemia cell lines and primary
B-ALL, in contrast to T-ALL cell lines and patient samples. Aberrant methylation 
of Notch3 and Hes5 in B-ALL was associated with gene silencing and was
accompanied by decrease of H3K4 trimethylation and H3K9 acetylation and gain of
H3K9 trimethylation and H3K27 trimethylation. 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment
restored Hes5 expression and decreased promoter hypermethylation in most leukemia
cell lines and primary B-ALL samples. Restoration of Hes5 expression by
lentiviral transduction resulted in growth arrest and apoptosis in Hes5 negative 
B-ALL cells but not in Hes5 expressing T-ALL cells. These data suggest that
epigenetic modifications are implicated in silencing of tumor suppressor of
Notch/Hes pathway in B-ALL.

PMCID: PMC3637323
PMID: 23637910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2013 Feb;6(1):191-201. doi:
10.1161/CIRCEP.111.973420. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

Mechanism-based facilitated maturation of human pluripotent stem cell-derived
cardiomyocytes.

Lieu DK(1), Fu JD, Chiamvimonvat N, Tung KC, McNerney GP, Huser T, Keller G, Kong
CW, Li RA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) can be efficiently and
reproducibly directed into cardiomyocytes (CMs) using stage-specific induction
protocols. However, their functional properties and suitability for clinical and 
other applications have not been evaluated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here we showed that CMs derived from multiple pluripotent
human stem cell lines (hESC: H1, HES2) and types (induced pluripotent stem cell) 
using different in vitro differentiation protocols (embryoid body formation,
endodermal induction, directed differentiation) commonly displayed immature,
proarrhythmic action potential properties such as high degree of automaticity,
depolarized resting membrane potential, Phase 4- depolarization, and delayed
after-depolarization. Among the panoply of sarcolemmal ionic currents
investigated
(I(Na)(+)/I(CaL)(+)/I(Kr)(+)/I(NCX)(+)/I(f)(+)/I(to)(+)/I(K1)(-)/I(Ks)(-)), we
pinpointed the lack of the Kir2.1-encoded inwardly rectifying K(+) current
(I(K1)) as the single mechanistic contributor to the observed immature
electrophysiological properties in hESC-CMs. Forced expression of Kir2.1 in
hESC-CMs led to robust expression of Ba(2+)-sensitive I(K1) and, more
importantly, completely ablated all the proarrhythmic action potential traits,
rendering the electrophysiological phenotype indistinguishable from the adult
counterparts. These results provided the first link of a complex developmentally 
arrested phenotype to a major effector gene, and importantly, further led us to
develop a bio-mimetic culturing strategy for enhancing maturation.
CONCLUSIONS: By providing the environmental cues that are missing in conventional
culturing method, this approach did not require any genetic or pharmacological
interventions. Our findings can facilitate clinical applications, drug discovery,
and cardiotoxicity screening by improving the yield, safety, and efficacy of
derived CMs.

PMCID: PMC3757253
PMID: 23392582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52121. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052121. Epub 2012 Dec 17.

Spatial and temporal gene expression differences in core and periinfarct areas in
experimental stroke: a microarray analysis.

Ramos-Cejudo J(1), Gutiérrez-Fernández M, Rodríguez-Frutos B, Expósito Alcaide M,
Sánchez-Cabo F, Dopazo A, Díez-Tejedor E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Stroke Centre, Neuroscience and Cerebrovascular
Research Laboratory, La Paz University Hospital, Neuroscience Area of IdiPAZ
(Health Research Institute), Autónoma University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: A large number of genes are regulated to promote brain repair
following stroke. The thorough analysis of this process can help identify new
markers and develop therapeutic strategies. This study analyzes gene expression
following experimental stroke.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A microarray study of gene expression in the
core, periinfarct and contralateral cortex was performed in adult Sprague-Dawley 
rats (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>60) after 24 hours (acute phase) or 3 days (delayed stage) of permanent
middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion. Independent qRT-PCR validation (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>12)
was performed for 22 of the genes. Functional data were evaluated by Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis. The number of genes differentially expressed was 2,612 (24 h)
and 5,717 (3 d) in the core; and 3,505 (24 h) and 1,686 (3 d) in the periinfarct 
area (logFC>|1|; adjP<0.05). Expression of many neurovascular unit development
genes was altered at 24 h and 3 d including HES2, OLIG2, LINGO1 and NOGO-A;
chemokines like CXCL1 and CXCL12, stress-response genes like HIF-1A, and trophic 
factors like BDNF or BMP4. Nearly half of the detected genes (43%) had not been
associated with stroke previously.
CONCLUSIONS: This comprehensive study of gene regulation in the core and
periinfarct areas at different times following permanent MCA occlusion provides
new data that can be helpful in translational research.

PMCID: PMC3524135
PMID: 23284893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45963. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045963. Epub 2012 Sep 27.

Human pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes: response to TTX and lidocain 
reveals strong cell to cell variability.

Sheng X(1), Reppel M, Nguemo F, Mohammad FI, Kuzmenkin A, Hescheler J, Pfannkuche
K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Neurophysiology, University of Cologne, Germany.

Stem cell derived cardiomyocytes generated either from human embryonic stem cells
(hESC-CMs) or human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC-CMs) hold great promise
for the investigation of early developmental processes in human cardiomyogenesis 
and future cell replacement strategies. We have analyzed electrophysiological
properties of hESC-CMs (HES2) and hiPSC-CMs, derived from reprogrammed adult
foreskin fibroblasts that have previously been found to be highly similar in
terms of gene expression. In contrast to the similarity found in the expression
profile we found substantial differences in action potentials (APs) and sodium
currents at late stage (day 60) of in vitro differentiation with higher sodium
currents in hiPSC-CMs. Sensitivity to lidocain was considerably reduced in
hESC-CMs as compared to hiPSC-CMs, and the effect could not be explained by
differences in beating frequency. In contrast, sensitivity to tetrodotoxin (TTX) 
was higher in hESC-CMs suggesting different contributions of TTX-sensitive and
TTX-resistant sodium channels to AP generation. These data point to physiological
differences that are not necessarily detected by genomics. We conclude that novel
pharmacological screening-assays using hiPSC-CMs need to be applied with some
caution.

PMCID: PMC3459939
PMID: 23029342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27880. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027880. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Hes6 is required for the neurogenic activity of neurogenin and NeuroD.

Murai K(1), Philpott A, Jones PH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Cancer Cell Unit, Hutchison-MRC Research Centre, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

In the embryonic neural plate, a subset of precursor cells with neurogenic
potential differentiates into neurons. This process of primary neurogenesis
requires both the specification of cells for neural differentiation, regulated by
Notch signaling, and the activity of neurogenic transcription factors such as
neurogenin and NeuroD which drive the program of neural gene expression. Here we 
study the role of Hes6, a member of the hairy enhancer of split family of
transcription factors, in primary neurogenesis in Xenopus embryos. Hes6 is an
atypical Hes gene in that it is not regulated by Notch signaling and promotes
neural differentiation in mouse cell culture models. We show that depletion of
Xenopus Hes6 (Xhes6) by morpholino antisense oligonucleotides results in a
failure of neural differentiation, a phenotype rescued by both wild type Xhes6
and a Xhes6 mutant unable to bind DNA. However, an Xhes6 mutant that lacks the
ability to bind Groucho/TLE transcriptional co-regulators is only partly able to 
rescue the phenotype. Further analysis reveals that Xhes6 is essential for the
induction of neurons by both neurogenin and NeuroD, acting via at least two
distinct mechanisms, the inhibition of antineurogenic Xhairy proteins and by
interaction with Groucho/TLE family proteins. We conclude Xhes6 is essential for 
neurogenesis in vivo, acting via multiple mechanisms to relieve inhibition of
proneural transcription factor activity within the neural plate.

PMCID: PMC3218063
PMID: 22114720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Diabetologia. 2012 Feb;55(2):358-71. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2335-x. Epub 2011
Nov 11.

The functional and molecular characterisation of human embryonic stem
cell-derived insulin-positive cells compared with adult pancreatic beta cells.

Basford CL(1), Prentice KJ, Hardy AB, Sarangi F, Micallef SJ, Li X, Guo Q,
Elefanty AG, Stanley EG, Keller G, Allister EM, Nostro MC, Wheeler MB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Toronto General Research
Institute, TMDT, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2012 Feb;55(2):279-81.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Using a novel directed differentiation protocol, we recently
generated up to 25% insulin-producing cells from human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs) (insulin(+) cells). At this juncture, it was important to functionally
and molecularly characterise these hESC-derived insulin(+) cells and identify key
differences and similarities between them and primary beta cells.
METHODS: We used a new reporter hESC line with green fluorescent protein (GFP)
cDNA targeted to the INS locus by homologous recombination (INS (GFP/w)) and an
untargeted hESC line (HES2). INS (GFP/w) allowed efficient identification and
purification of GFP-producing (INS:GFP(+)) cells. Insulin(+) cells were examined 
for key features of adult beta cells using microarray, quantitative PCR,
secretion assays, imaging and electrophysiology.
RESULTS: Immunofluorescent staining showed complete co-localisation of insulin
with GFP; however, cells were often multihormonal, many with granules containing 
insulin and glucagon. Electrophysiological recordings revealed variable K(ATP)
and voltage-gated Ca(2+) channel activity, and reduced glucose-induced cytosolic 
Ca(2+) uptake. This translated into defective glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion but, intriguingly, appropriate glucagon responses. Gene profiling
revealed differences in global gene expression between INS:GFP(+) cells and adult
human islets; however, INS:GFP(+) cells had remarkably similar expression of
endocrine-lineage transcription factors and genes involved in glucose sensing and
exocytosis.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: INS:GFP(+) cells can be purified from differentiated 
hESCs, providing a superior source of insulin-producing cells. Genomic analyses
revealed that INS:GFP(+) cells collectively resemble immature endocrine cells.
However, insulin(+) cells were heterogeneous, a fact that translated into
important functional differences within this population. The information gained
from this study may now be used to generate new iterations of functioning beta
cells that can be purified for transplant.

PMID: 22075915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cell Reprogram. 2011 Dec;13(6):527-37. doi: 10.1089/cell.2011.0038. Epub 2011 Oct
26.

Cobalt chloride pretreatment promotes cardiac differentiation of human embryonic 
stem cells under atmospheric oxygen level.

Ng KM(1), Chan YC, Lee YK, Lai WH, Au KW, Fung ML, Siu CW, Li RA, Tse HF.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre of Heart, Brain, Hormone and Healthy Ageing, Li Ka Shing
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Physiology, University of Hong Kong, and
Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, Republic of China.

Our previous study demonstrated the direct involvement of the HIF-1a subunit in
the promotion of cardiac differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells (ESCs).
We report the use of cobalt chloride to induce HIF-1a stabilization in human ESCs
to promote cardiac differentiation. Treatment of undifferentiated hES2 human ESCs
with 50<U+2009>µM cobalt chloride markedly increased protein levels of the HIF-1a
subunit, and was associated with increased expression of early cardiac specific
transcription factors and cardiotrophic factors including NK2.5, vascular
endothelial growth factor, and cardiotrophin-1. When pretreated cells were
subjected to cardiac differentiation, a notable increase in the occurrence of
beating embryoid bodies and sarcomeric actinin-positive cells was observed, along
with increased expression of the cardiac-specific markers, MHC-A, MHC-B, and
MLC2V. Electrophysiological study revealed increased atrial- and nodal-like cells
in the cobalt chloride-pretreated group. Confocal calcium imaging analysis
indicated that the maximum upstroke and decay velocities were significantly
increased in both noncaffeine and caffeine-induced calcium transient in
cardiomyocytes derived from the cobalt chloride-pretreated cells, suggesting
these cells were functionally more mature. In conclusion, our study demonstrated 
that cobalt chloride pretreatment of hES2 human ESCs promotes cardiac
differentiation and the maturation of calcium homeostasis of cardiomyocytes
derived from ESCs.

PMID: 22029419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012 May;58(5):682-9. doi: 10.1002/pbc.23202. Epub 2011 Jul
8.

Notch pathway activation induces neuroblastoma tumor cell growth arrest.

Zage PE(1), Nolo R, Fang W, Stewart J, Garcia-Manero G, Zweidler-McKay PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, Children's Cancer Hospital, The University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Notch pathway signaling has critical roles in differentiation,
proliferation, and survival, and has oncogenic or tumor suppressor effects in a
variety of malignancies. The goal of this study was to evaluate the effects of
Notch activation on human neuroblastoma cells.
PROCEDURE: Quantitative RT-PCR, immunoblots, and immunohistochemistry were used
to determine the expression of Notch receptors (Notch1-4), cleaved Notch1 (ICN1),
and downstream targets (HES1-5) in human neuroblastoma cell lines and patient
tumor samples. Notch pathway signaling was induced using intracellular Notch
(ICN1-3) and HES gene constructs or direct culture on Notch ligands. Quantitative
methylation-specific PCR was used to quantify methylation of the HES gene
promoters, and the effects of treatment with decitabine were measured.
RESULTS: Neuroblastoma cells express varying levels of Notch receptors and low
levels of HES genes at baseline. However, no endogenous activation of the Notch
pathway was detected in neuroblastoma cell lines or patient tumor samples.
Expression of activated Notch intracellular domains and HES gene products led to 
growth arrest. The HES2 and HES5 gene promoters were found to be heavily
methylated in most neuroblastoma lines, and HES gene expression could be induced 
through treatment with decitabine.
CONCLUSIONS: We report that neuroblastoma cell lines express multiple Notch
receptors, which are inactive at baseline. Activation of the Notch pathway via
ligand binding consistently resulted in growth arrest. HES gene expression
appears to be regulated epigenetically and could be induced with decitabine.
These findings support a tumor suppressor role for Notch signaling in
neuroblastoma.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3264695
PMID: 21744479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Nephron Exp Nephrol. 2011;118(4):e100-8. doi: 10.1159/000324209. Epub 2011 Mar 2.

Extracellular YB-1 blockade in experimental nephritis upregulates Notch-3
receptor expression and signaling.

Raffetseder U(1), Rauen T, Boor P, Ostendorf T, Hanssen L, Floege J, En-Nia A,
Djudjaj S, Frye BC, Mertens PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Clinical Immunology, University Hospital RWTH
Aachen, Aachen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Notch receptors are involved in kidney development and pathogenesis
of inflammatory glomerular diseases. Given the secretion of Y-box (YB) protein-1 
following cytokine stimulation and subsequent extracellular association with
membrane receptor Notch-3 in vitro, we elucidated functional effects of YB-1
targeting on the Notch-3 signaling pathway.
METHODS: Rat mesangial cells were challenged with a monoclonal anti-YB-1 antibody
(YB-1-mAb) and analyzed for YB-1 and Notch-3 expression. Notch-3 expression in
mice with a targeted disruption of one YB-1 allele (YB-1(+/d)) was compared with 
their wild-type littermates. Furthermore, YB-1-mAb was applied during
mesangioproliferative anti-Thy1.1 nephritis, and glomerular Notch-3, Notch target
genes and YB-1 expression were analyzed by immunohistochemistry, quantitative
real-time PCR and immunoblotting.
RESULTS: Upon challenge with YB-1-mAb, rat mesangial cells showed an increased
expression of YB-1 and Notch-3 protein. Concordantly, we found a significant
upregulation of Notch-3 expression in renal cells of YB-1(+/d) mice. YB-1-mAb
treatment in anti-Thy1.1 nephritis resulted in enhanced mesangial Notch-3
expression and differential Notch target gene activation (HES2/Hey-2). Notably,
YB-1 mRNA content did not differ between groups; however, glomerular YB-1 protein
was significantly increased, suggesting a posttranslational mechanism.
CONCLUSION: Extracellular targeting of YB-1 potently induces glomerular Notch-3
receptor expression, Notch signaling and YB-1 stabilization, most likely via an
autoregulatory feedback mechanism.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21372592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 May;31(5):1059-65. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.217935. Epub 2011 Feb 17.

Soluble Jagged-1 inhibits neointima formation by attenuating Notch-Herp2
signaling.

Caolo V(1), Schulten HM, Zhuang ZW, Murakami M, Wagenaar A, Verbruggen S, Molin
DG, Post MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht,
Maastricht University, Universiteitssingel 50, 6229 ER Maastricht, the
Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Notch has been implicated in neointima formation as reflected by
increased Notch/Jagged expression on vascular injury and the promigratory effect 
of Notch signaling on smooth muscle cells. Soluble Jagged-1 (sJag1) has been
shown to inhibit Notch signaling in vitro; however, its capacity to suppress
neointima formation remains unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Balloon injury of rat carotid arteries induced Notch1,
Notch3, and Jagged-1 expression at days 3 and 14 postinjury. Notch signaling was 
activated as shown by increased expression of the Notch target gene Herp2.
Adenoviral sJag1 (Ad-sJag1) transfection reduced neointima formation in carotid
artery and enhanced reendothelialization, whereas adenoviral full-length Jagged-1
(Ad-Fl-Jag1) or LacZ had no effect. Injury-induced Herp2 expression was absent in
vessels treated with Ad-sJag1. Consistently, Herp2 expression was reduced in
Ad-sJag1-infected or recombinant sJag1 -treated coronary artery smooth muscle
cells (CASMCs). Ad-sJag1 had no effect on human umbilical endothelial cell
behavior, but it significantly reduced proliferation and migration of CASMCs.
Overexpression of Herp2 in sJag1-treated CASMCs rescued the migratory and
proliferative capacity in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that sJag1 can inhibit neointima formation
after balloon injury by decreasing smooth muscle cell proliferation and migration
through interference with Notch-Herp2 signaling.

PMID: 21330605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Stem Cell Res. 2010 Nov;5(3):173-87. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2010.07.001. Epub 2010
Aug 1.

Derivation, characterization, and gene expression profile of two new human ES
cell lines from India.

Mandal A(1), Bhowmik S, Patki A, Viswanathan C, Majumdar AS.

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Medicine, Reliance Life Sciences Pvt Ltd, Dhirubhai Ambani Life
Sciences Centre, R-282, TTC Industrial Area of MIDC, Thane Belapur Road, Rabale, 
Navi Mumbai 400 701, India. arundhati_mandal@relbio.com

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) offer new avenues for studying human
development and disease progression in addition to their tremendous potential
toward development of cell-replacement therapies for various cellular disorders. 
We have earlier reported the derivation and characterization of Relicell(®) hES1,
the first fully characterized hESC line generated from the Indian subcontinent.
Recent studies have demonstrated discrete differences among hESC lines, in terms 
of both their growth properties and their differentiation propensity. To address 
some of these issues in the context of hESC research in India, we have recently
generated two new hESC lines: Relicell(®) hES2 and Relicell(®)hES3. Both these
cell lines were derived using a combinatorial approach of immunosurgery followed 
by mechanical surgery for inner cell mass isolation. The cell lines exhibit the
usual hESC characteristics including their ability to differentiate both in vitro
and in vivo to yield the three germinal layers. Whole genome microarray analysis 
of these cell lines was compared with Relicell(®)hES1 and it showed that
approximately 9000 genes were expressed by these lines. As expected the
expression pattern of these new cell lines bore close resemblance to that of
Relicell(®)hES1. A majority of the pluripotency genes and the genes known to
inhibit various differentiation pathways were also expressed by these cell lines.
We also observed that each of these cell lines expressed a unique set of genes
that are mutually exclusive from each other. These results represent the first
detailed characterization of a set of hESC lines originating from India.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20826120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Stem Cell Res. 2010 May;4(3):165-79. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2010.03.001. Epub 2010
Mar 12.

Up-scaling single cell-inoculated suspension culture of human embryonic stem
cells.

Singh H(1), Mok P, Balakrishnan T, Rahmat SN, Zweigerdt R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biology (IMB), Immunos, 138648 Singapore.
harmeet.singh@imb.a-star.edu.sg

We have systematically developed single cell-inoculated suspension cultures of
human embryonic stem cells (hESC) in defined media. Cell survival was dependent
on hESC re-aggregation. In the presence of the Rho kinase inhibitor Y-27632 (Ri) 
only approximately 44% of the seeded cells were rescued, but an optimized heat
shock treatment combined with Ri significantly increased cell survival to
approximately 60%. Mechanistically, our data suggest that E-cadherin plays a role
in hESC aggregation and that dissociation and re-aggregation upon passaging
functions as a purification step towards a pluripotency markers-enriched
population. Mass expansion of hESC was readily achieved by up-scaling 2 ml
cultures to serial passaging in 50 ml spinner flasks. A media comparison revealed
that mTeSR was superior to KnockOut-SR in supporting cell proliferation and
pluripotency. Persistent expression of pluripotency markers was achieved for two 
lines (hES2, hES3) that were used at higher passages (>86). In contrast, rapid
down regulation of Oct4, Tra-1-60, and SSEA4 was observed for ESI049, a
clinically compliant line, used at passages 20-36. The up-scaling strategy has
significant potential to provide pluripotent cells on a clinical scale.
Nevertheless, our data also highlights a significant line-to-line variability and
the need for a critical assessment of novel methods with numerous relevant cell
lines.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20363202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Stem Cells. 2009 Oct;27(10):2446-56. doi: 10.1002/stem.182.

Identification of human embryonic stem cell surface markers by combined
membrane-polysome translation state array analysis and immunotranscriptional
profiling.

Kolle G(1), Ho M, Zhou Q, Chy HS, Krishnan K, Cloonan N, Bertoncello I, Laslett
AL, Grimmond SM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Queensland, 
Australia.

Surface marker expression forms the basis for characterization and isolation of
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). Currently, there are few well-defined protein
epitopes that definitively mark hESCs. Here we combine immunotranscriptional
profiling of hESC lines with membrane-polysome translation state array analysis
(TSAA) to determine the full set of genes encoding potential hESC surface marker 
proteins. Three independently isolated hESC lines (HES2, H9, and MEL1) grown
under feeder and feeder-free conditions were sorted into subpopulations by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting based on coimmunoreactivity to the hESC
surface markers GCTM-2 and CD9. Colony-forming assays confirmed that cells
displaying high coimmunoreactivity to GCTM-2 and CD9 constitute an enriched
subpopulation displaying multiple stem cell properties. Following microarray
profiling, 820 genes were identified that were common to the
GCTM-2(high)/CD9(high) stem cell-like subpopulation. Membrane-polysome TSAA
analysis of hESCs identified 1,492 mRNAs encoding actively translated plasma
membrane and secreted proteins. Combining these data sets, 88 genes encode
proteins that mark the pluripotent subpopulation, of which only four had been
previously reported. Cell surface immunoreactivity was confirmed for two of these
markers: TACSTD1/EPCAM and CDH3/P-Cadherin, with antibodies for EPCAM able to
enrich for pluripotent hESCs. This comprehensive listing of both hESCs and
spontaneous differentiation-associated transcripts and survey of translated
membrane-bound and secreted proteins provides a valuable resource for future
study into the role of the extracellular environment in both the maintenance of
pluripotency and directed differentiation.

PMID: 19650036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Mar 15;179(6):457-66. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200705-795OC. Epub 2008 Dec 23.

Down-regulation of the notch pathway in human airway epithelium in association
with smoking and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Tilley AE(1), Harvey BG, Heguy A, Hackett NR, Wang R, O'Connor TP, Crystal RG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Weill Medical College of
Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

RATIONALE: The airway epithelium of smokers is subject to a variety of mechanisms
of injury with consequent modulation of epithelial regeneration and disordered
differentiation. Several signaling pathways, including the Notch pathway, control
epithelial differentiation in lung morphogenesis, but little is known about the
role of these pathways in adults.
OBJECTIVES: We tested the hypotheses that Notch-related genes are expressed in
the normal nonsmoker small airway epithelium of human adults, and that
Notch-related gene expression is down-regulated in healthy smokers and smokers
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: We used microarray technology to evaluate the expression of 55
Notch-related genes in the small airway epithelium of nonsmokers. We used TaqMan 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to confirm the expression of key
genes and we used immunohistochemistry to assess the expression of Notch-related 
proteins in the airway epithelium. Changes in expression of Notch genes in
healthy smokers and smokers with COPD compared with nonsmokers were evaluated by 
PCR.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Microarray analysis demonstrated that 45 of 55
Notch-related genes are expressed in the small airway epithelium of adults.
TaqMan PCR confirmed the expression of key genes with highest expression of the
ligand DLL1, the receptor NOTCH2, and the downstream effector HES1.
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated the expression of Jag1, Notch2, Hes1, and Hes5 
in airway epithelium. Several Notch ligands, receptors, and downstream effector
genes were down-regulated in smokers, with more genes down-regulated in smokers
with COPD than in healthy smokers.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations are consistent with the hypothesis that the Notch
pathway likely plays a role in the human adult airway epithelium, with
down-regulation of Notch pathway gene expression in association with smoking and 
COPD.

PMCID: PMC2654975
PMID: 19106307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Curr Protoc Stem Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;Chapter 1:Unit 1F.2. doi:
10.1002/9780470151808.sc01f02s2.

Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to cardiomyocytes by coculture with
endoderm in serum-free medium.

Mummery CL(1), Ward D, Passier R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Utrecht Medical Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Many of the applications envisaged for human embryonic stem cells (hESC)
undergoing cardiomyogenesis require that the differentiation procedure is robust 
and high yield. For many hESC lines currently available this is a challenge;
beating areas are often obtained but subsequent analysis shows only few (<1%)
cardiomyocytes actually present. Here the authors provide a protocol based on
serum-free coculture with a mouse endoderm-like cell line (END2), which yields
cultures containing on average 25% cardiomyocytes for two widely available hESC
lines, hES2 and hES3. The authors also provide a variant on the protocol based on
growth of hESC aggregates/embryoid bodies in END2-conditioned medium and a method
for dissociating beating aggregates without compromising cardiomyocyte viability 
so that they can be used for transplantation into animals or further
(electrophysiological) analysis.

Copyright 2007 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 18785170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Stem Cells Dev. 2009 May;18(4):653-60. doi: 10.1089/scd.2008.0160.

Adipocyte differentiation in human embryonic stem cells transduced with Oct4
shRNA lentivirus.

Hannan NR(1), Wolvetang EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

Oct4 is one of the master pluripotency genes that controls differentiation of
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). We generated HES2 and HES3 hESC lines stably 
transduced with lentivirus carrying Oct4 short hairpin RNA (shRNA) that display
80-90% reduction of Oct4 expression. Analysis of pluripotency marker expression
shows that these Oct4 shRNA-transduced hESCs display normal wild-type expression 
levels of the pluripotency marker CD9 but an absence of GCTM2 expression. These
hESC-derived adipocyte precursor cells display a characteristic morphology and
can be propagated and cryopreserved as a standard stem cell line. Interestingly, 
Oct4 shRNA-transduced hESCs display a remarkably high lineage-specific
spontaneous differentiation toward adipocytes. After two weeks of spontaneous
differentiation under feeder-free conditions, 60-70% of cells display a mature
adipocyte morphology as well as the expression of multiple adipocyte-specific
mRNAs as assessed by RT-PCR. The upregulation of trophoblast, mesoderm, and
endoderm transcripts is, however, also detected in these spontaneously
differentiating cultures. These Oct4 shRNA hESCs will be an interesting model
system to study human fetal adipogenesis and constitutes a renewable resource for
obesity drug screening purposes.

PMID: 18764734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Dev Biol. 2008 Aug 1;320(1):304-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.015. Epub 2008
Apr 23.

Notch signaling during larval and juvenile development in the polychaete annelid 
Capitella sp. I.

Thamm K(1), Seaver EC.

Author information: 
(1)Kewalo Marine Lab, PBRC/University of Hawaii, 41 Ahui Street, Honolulu, HI
96813, USA. Katrin.Thamm@allzool.bio.uni-giessen.de

Notch signaling is involved in a large range of developmental processes, and has 
been functionally implicated in body plan segmentation in two of the three
diverse segmented taxa, the vertebrates and arthropods. Here we investigate
expression of Notch, Delta, and hes gene homologues during larval and juvenile
development in the polychaete annelid Capitella sp. I., a member of the third
group of segmented animals. During larval stages, CapI-Notch, CapI-Delta,
CapI-hes2, and CapI-hes3 transcripts are initially detected in broad ectodermal
domains in future segments as well as in the brain and foregut; later,
CapI-Notch, CapI-Delta, and CapI-hes2 transcripts are detected in the presumptive
chaetal sacs. In contrast, CapI-hes1 has a segmentally reiterated pattern in a
restricted region of the mesoderm in each presumptive segment. CapI-Notch,
CapI-Delta, CapI-hes2, and CapI-hes3 and CapI-hes1 are all expressed in the
terminal growth zone that generates post-metamorphic segments, however, CapI-hes1
has a non-overlapping complementary expression pattern to that of CapI-Notch and 
CapI-Delta. CapI-Delta and CapI-Notch transcripts are localized to already formed
segments, with posterior boundaries that correlate with the posterior boundary of
the nascent segment, while CapI-hes1 lies posterior to CapI-Notch and CapI-Delta.
The localization of CapI-Notch, CapI-Delta, and CapI-hes transcripts correlate
with areas of rapid cell proliferation in Capitella, which include the brain,
foregut, and terminal growth zone.

PMID: 18511030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Aug 8;372(4):553-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.05.076. Epub 2008 May 27.

Distinct cardiogenic preferences of two human embryonic stem cell (hESC) lines
are imprinted in their proteomes in the pluripotent state.

Moore JC(1), Fu J, Chan YC, Lin D, Tran H, Tse HF, Li RA.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program, University of California, Room 650, Shriners Hospital, 2425
Stockton Blvd, Davis, CA 95817, USA.

Although both the H1 and HES2 human embryonic stem cell lines (NIH codes: WA01
and ES02, respectively) are capable of forming all three germ layers and their
derivatives, various lines of evidence including the need to use different
protocols to induce cardiac differentiation hint that they have distinct
preferences to become chamber-specific heart cells. However, a direct systematic 
comparison has not been reported. Here we electrophysiologically demonstrated
that the distributions of ventricular-, atrial- and pacemaker-like derivatives
were indeed different (ratios=39:61:0 and 64:33:3 for H1 and HES2, respectively).
Based on these results, we hypothesized the differences in their cardiogenic
potentials are imprinted in the proteomes of undifferentiated H1 and HES2. Using 
multiplexing, high-resolution 2-D Differential In Gel Electrophoresis (DIGE) to
minimize gel-to-gel variations that are common in conventional 2-D gels, a total 
of 2000 individual protein spots were separated. Of which, 55 were >2-fold
differentially expressed in H1 and HES2 (p<0.05) and identified by mass
spectrometery. Bioinformatic analysis of these protein differences further
revealed candidate pathways that contribute to the H1 and HES2 phenotypes. We
conclude that H1 and HES2 have predetermined preferences to become ventricular,
atrial, and pacemaker cells due to discrete differences in their proteomes. These
results improve our basic understanding of hESCs and may lead to mechanism-based 
methods for their directed cardiac differentiation into chamber-specific
cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC2665880
PMID: 18503758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Int J Dev Biol. 2008;52(1):43-53.

Spa-1 regulates the maintenance and differentiation of human embryonic stem
cells.

Lee YJ(1), Nah HY, Hong SH, Lee JW, Jeon I, Pak JH, Huh JR, Kim SH, Chae HD, Kang
BM, Kim CG, Kim CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine, University of
Ulsan, Asan Medical Center, Songpa-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
yjleelee@amc.seoul.kr

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are pluripotent, whereby they can proliferate 
endlessly and differentiate into many different cell types. At the molecular
level, little is known of the mechanisms underlying their capability for
self-renewal and differentiation. In the present study, we established two new
hESC lines (AMC-hES1 and AMC-hES2) and demonstrated the existence of a regulator 
that may be a key molecule in hESC dynamics. Spa-1 is a principal Ras-proximate 1
(Rap1) GTPase-activating protein in hematopoietic progenitor cells that regulates
Rap1-related signal transduction and is expressed restrictively in human adult
tissues (bone marrow, thymus, and spleen). To investigate its functions in hESCs,
we examined spa-1 expression profiles during hESC differentiation and used RNA
interference (RNAi) to downregulate spa-1 in these cells. Our results show that
Spa-1 is expressed in undifferentiated hESCs and is downregulated during hESC
differentiation. In addition, the process of passing from the mode of
self-renewal to that of differentiation in hESCs was regulated by spa-1 via
Rap1/Raf/mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase/extracellular signal-related
kinase signaling. An RNAi expression vector against spa-1 (pSUPER.retro.puro) was
transfected into hESCs, which were seen to differentiate into three germ layers
in spite of being in the undifferentiated condition. Based on our findings,
therefore, it appears that spa-1 may be involved in hESC dynamics, and our
results provide fundamental information regarding the self-renewal and
differentiation of hESCs.

PMID: 18033671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Stem Cells. 2007 Dec;25(12):3038-44. Epub 2007 Sep 13.

Functional sarcoplasmic reticulum for calcium handling of human embryonic stem
cell-derived cardiomyocytes: insights for driven maturation.

Liu J(1), Fu JD, Siu CW, Li RA.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, University
of California Davis, Davis, California, USA.

Cardiomyocytes (CMs) are nonregenerative. Self-renewable pluripotent human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) can differentiate into CMs for cell-based therapies.
In adult CMs, Ca(2+)-induced Ca(2+) release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) 
via the ryanodine receptor (RyR) is key in excitation-contraction coupling.
Therefore, proper Ca(2+) handling properties of hESC-derived CMs are required for
their successful functional integration with the recipient heart. Here, we
performed a comprehensive analysis of CMs differentiated from the H1 (H1-CMs) and
HES2 (HES2-CMs) hESC lines and human fetal (F) and adult (A) left ventricular
(LV) CMs. Upon electrical stimulation, all of H1-, HES2-, and FLV-CMs generated
similar Ca(2+) transients. Caffeine induced Ca(2+) release in 65% of FLV-CMs and 
approximately 38% of H1- and HES2-CMs. Ryanodine significantly reduced the
electrically evoked Ca(2+) transient amplitudes of caffeine-responsive but not
-insensitive HES2- and H1-CMs and slowed their upstroke; thapsigargin, which
inhibits the sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA) pump, reduced the 
amplitude of only caffeine-responsive HES2- and H1-CMs and slowed the decay.
SERCA2a expression was highest in ALV-CMs but comparable among H1-, HES2-, and
FLV-CMs. The Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger was substantially expressed in both HES2- and
H1-CMs relative to FLV- and ALV-CMs. RyR was expressed in HES2-, H1-, and
FLV-CMs, but the organized pattern for ALV-CMs was not observed. The regulatory
proteins junctin, triadin, and calsequestrin were expressed in ALV-CMs but not
HES2- and H1-CMs. We conclude that functional SRs are indeed expressed in
hESC-CMs, albeit immaturely. Our results may lead to driven maturation of Ca(2+) 
handling properties of hESC-CMs for enhanced contractile functions. Disclosure of
potential conflicts of interest is found at the end of this article.

PMID: 17872499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int J Oncol. 2007 Aug;31(2):461-6.

Integrative genomic analyses on HES/HEY family: Notch-independent HES1, HES3
transcription in undifferentiated ES cells, and Notch-dependent HES1, HES5, HEY1,
HEY2, HEYL transcription in fetal tissues, adult tissues, or cancer.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

Notch signaling pathway maintains stem cells through transcriptional activation
of HES/HEY family members to repress tissue-specific transcription factors. Here,
comparative integromic analyses on HES/HEY family members were carried out. HES3 
gene encodes two isoforms due to alternative promoters. Complete coding sequence 
of HES3 variant 2 was determined by curating CX755241.1 EST. Refined phylogenetic
analysis using HES3 variant 2 instead of variant 1 revealed that mammalian bHLH
transcription factors with Orange domain were grouped into HES subfamily (HES1,
HES2, HES3, HES4, HES5, HES6, HES7) and HEY subfamily (HEY1, HEY2, HEYL,
HESL/HELT, DEC1/BHLHB2, DEC2/BHLHB3). Eight amino-acid residues were added to the
C-terminal WRPW motif in human HES3 due to lineage specific T to G nucleotide
change at stop codon of chimpanzee, rat, and mouse HES3 orthologs. HES1 and HES3 
were expressed in undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells. HES1 was also
expressed in fetal tissues, and regenerating liver. HES1, HEY1 and HEY2 were
expressed in endothelial cells. HES1, HES4 and HES6 were expressed in gastric
cancer, HES1 and DEC1 in pancreatic cancer, HES1, HES2, HES4, HES6 and DEC2 in
colorectal cancer. HES6 was also expressed in other tumors, such as brain tumors,
melanoma, small cell lung cancer, retinoblastoma, ovarian cancer, and breast
cancer. Double NANOG-binding sites, CSL/RBPSUH-binding site and TATA-box in HES1 
promoter, NANOG-, SOX2-, POU5F1/OCT3/OCT4-binding sites and TATA-box in HES3
promoter, double CSL-binding sites in HES5 promoter, SOX2-, POU-binding sites and
TATA-box in HES6 promoter, and CSL-binding site in HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL promoters 
were evolutionarily conserved. However, double CSL-binding sites in mouse Hes7
promoter were not conserved in human HES7 promoter. Together these facts indicate
that HES1 and HES3 were target genes of the ES cell-specific network of
transcription factors, and that HES1, HES5, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL were target genes
of Notch signaling pathway.

PMID: 17611704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Neurosurg. 2007 Mar;106(3):417-27.

Contribution of Notch signaling activation to human glioblastoma multiforme.

Kanamori M(1), Kawaguchi T, Nigro JM, Feuerstein BG, Berger MS, Miele L, Pieper
RO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, UCSF Cancer Center, University of
California, San Francisco, California 94115-0875, USA.

Comment in
    J Neurosurg. 2007 Nov;107(5):1060-1; author reply 1061-2.

OBJECT: Because activation of Notch receptors has been suggested to be critical
for Ras-mediated transformation, and because many gliomas exhibit deregulated Ras
signaling, the authors measured Notch levels and activation in primary samples
and cell lines derived from glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) as well as the
contribution of Notch pathway activation to astrocytic transformation and growth.
METHODS: Western blot analysis of Notch 1 expression and activation showed that
Notch 1 protein was overexpressed and/or activated in Ras-transformed astrocytes,
in three of four GBM cell lines, and in four of five primary GBM samples.
Expansion of these studies to assess mRNA expression of components of the Notch
signaling pathway by cDNA expression array showed that cDNAs encoding components 
of the Notch signaling pathway, including the Notch ligand Jagged-1, Notch 3, and
the downstream targets of Notch (HES1 and HES2), were also overexpressed relative
to non-neoplastic brain controls in 23, 71, and 51% of 35 primary GBMs,
respectively. Furthermore, inhibition of Notch signaling by genetic or
pharmacological means led to selective suppression of the growth and expression
of markers of differentiation in cells exhibiting Notch pathway deregulation.
CONCLUSIONS: Notch activation contributes to Ras-induced transformation of glial 
cells and to glioma growth, survival, or both and as such may represent a new
target for GBM therapy.

PMID: 17367064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007 May;292(5):H2540-9. Epub 2007 Feb 2.

Erythrocyte-associated transients in capillary PO2: an isovolemic hemodilution
study in the rat spinotrapezius muscle.

Barker MC(1), Golub AS, Pittman RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Medical College of Virginia Campus, Virginia
Commonwealth University, 1101 E. Marshall Street, PO Box 980551, Richmond, VA
23298-0551, USA.

Mathematical simulations of oxygen delivery to tissue from capillaries that take 
into account the particulate nature of blood flow predict the existence of oxygen
tension (Po(2)) gradients between erythrocytes (RBCs). As RBCs and plasma
alternately pass an observation point, these gradients are manifested as rapid
fluctuations in Po(2), also known as erythrocyte-associated transients (EATs).
The impact of hemodilution on EATs and oxygen delivery at the capillary level of 
the microcirculation has yet to be elucidated. Therefore, in the present study,
phosphorescence quenching microscopy was used to measure EATs and Po(2) in
capillaries of the rat spinotrapezius muscle at the following systemic
hematocrits (Hct(sys)): normal (39%) and after moderate (HES1; 27%) or severe
(HES2; 15%) isovolemic hemodilution using a 6% hetastarch solution. A 532-nm
laser, generating 10-micros pulses concentrated onto a 0.9-microm spot, was used 
to obtain plasma Po(2) values 100 times/s at points along surface capillaries of 
the muscle. Mean capillary Po(2) (Pc(O(2)); means +/- SE) significantly decreased
between conditions (normal: 56 +/- 2 mmHg, n = 45; HES1: 47 +/- 2 mmHg, n = 62;
HES2: 27 +/- 2 mmHg, n = 52, where n = capillary number). In addition, the
magnitude of Po(2) transients (DeltaPo(2)) significantly decreased with
hemodilution (normal: 19 +/- 1 mmHg, n = 45; HES1: 11 +/- 1 mmHg, n = 62; HES2: 6
+/- 1 mmHg, n = 52). Results suggest that the decrease in Pc(O(2)) and DeltaPo(2)
with hemodilution is primarily dependent on Hct(sys) and subsequent microvascular
compensations.

PMID: 17277027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Development. 2006 Oct;133(20):4097-108.

Characterization and function of the bHLH-O protein XHes2: insight into the
mechanisms controlling retinal cell fate decision.

Sölter M(1), Locker M, Boy S, Taelman V, Bellefroid EJ, Perron M, Pieler T.

Author information: 
(1)DFG-Center of Molecular Physiology of the Brain, Department of Developmental
Biochemistry, University of Goettingen, Justus-von-Liebig-Weg 11, 37077
Goettingen, Germany.

Neurons and glial cells differentiate from common multipotent precursors in the
vertebrate retina. We have identified a novel member of the hairy/Enhancer of
split [E(spl)] gene family in Xenopus, XHes2, as a regulator to bias retinal
precursor cells towards a glial fate. XHes2 expression is predominantly
restricted to sensory organ territories, including the retina. Using in vivo
lipofection in the optic vesicle, we found that XHes2 overexpression dramatically
increases gliogenesis at the expense of neurogenesis. This increase in glial
cells correlates with a delayed cell cycle withdrawal of some retinal
progenitors. In addition, birthdating experiments suggest that XHes2 deviates
some early born cell types towards a glial fate that would normally have given
rise to neurons. Conversely, a significant inhibition of glial differentiation is
observed upon XHes2 loss of function. The gliogenic activity of XHes2 relies on
its ability to inhibit neuronal differentiation by at least two distinct
mechanisms: it not only negatively regulates XNgnr1 and NeuroD transcription, but
it also physically interacts with a subset of proneural bHLH proteins.

PMID: 17008450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 16;344(4):1166-71. Epub 2006 Apr 21.

Hath1 up-regulates gastric mucin gene expression in gastric cells.

Sekine A(1), Akiyama Y, Yanagihara K, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, 
Japan.

The Notch signaling pathway is known to mediate the differentiation and fate
specification of cells in embryonic stage and adult tissues. Several tumors
exhibit aberrant expression of Notch signaling component genes, such as
Notch1/2/3 and Hath1. In this study, we investigated the mRNA expression of seven
Notch-related genes, Notch1/2/3, Hes1/2/3, and Hath1, and then compared it with
the expression of gastric mucin genes, MUC5AC and MUC6, in eight gastric cancer
(GC) cell lines. Notch1/2/3 and Hes1 were expressed in most GC cell lines as well
as normal gastric mucosae, while Hes2/3 were expressed in neither these cell
lines nor the normal stomach. As for Hath1, five GC cell lines exhibited
undetectable levels, while normal gastric mucosa expressed Hath1. The expression 
patterns of Hath1 and MUC6 were closely related in most GC cell lines. Many
MUC5AC-positive cases also tended to show Hath1 expression. Over-expression of
Math1, a mouse Hath1 homolog, in the GC cells strongly enhanced both the MUC6 and
MUC5AC mRNA levels. Moreover, knockdown of Hath1 by means of RNA interference
significantly decreased the expression of both mucin genes. These data indicate
that Hath1 is one of the transcriptional regulators for MUC6 and MUC5AC in GC
cells. It is also possible that loss of Hath1 expression may play a role in
gastric carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16647036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Feb;17(2):391-5.

Comparative genomics on HHIP family orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M and M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Hedgehog, FGF, VEGF, and Notch signaling pathways network together for vascular
remodeling during embryogenesis and carcinogenesis. HHIP1 (HHIP) is an endogenous
antagonist for SHH, IHH, and DHH. Here, comparative integromics analyses on HHIP 
family members were performed by using bioinformatics and human intelligence.
HHIP1, HHIP2 (HHIPL1 or KIAA1822) and HHIP3 (HHIPL2 or KIAA1822L) constitute
human HHIP gene family. Rat Hhip1, Hhip2, and Hhip3 genes were identified within 
AC107504.4, AC094820.6, and AC134264.2 genome sequences, respectively.
HHIP-homologous (HIPH) domain with conserved 18 Cys residues was identified as
the novel domain conserved among mammalian HHIP1, HHIP2, and HHIP3 orthologs.
HHIP1 mRNA was expressed in coronary artery endothelial cells, prostate, and
rhabdomyosarcoma. HHIP2 mRNA was expressed in trabecular bone cells. HHIP3 mRNA
was expressed in testis, thyroid gland, osteoarthritic cartilarge, pancreatic
cancer, and lung cancer. Promoters of HHIP family genes were not well conserved
between human and rodents. Although GLI-, CSL-, and HES/HEY-binding sites were
not identified, eleven bHLH-binding sites were identified within human HHIP1
promoter. Expression of HES/HEY family members, including HES1, HES2, HES3, HES4,
HES5, HES6, HES7, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL, in coronary artery endothelial cells was
not detected in silico. Up-regulation of HHIP1 due to down-regulation of
Notch-CSL-HES/HEY signaling cascade repressing bHLH transcription factors results
in down-regulation of the Hedgehog-VEGF-Notch signaling cascade. On the other
hand, down-regulation of HHIP1 due to up-regulation of Notch signaling in
vascular endothelial cells during angiogenesis results in up-regulation of the
Hedgehog-VEGF-Notch signaling cascade. Because HHIP1 is the key molecule for
vascular remodeling, HHIP1 is the pharmacogenomics target in the fields of
oncology and vascular medicine.

PMID: 16391842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Reprod Biomed Online. 2005 Oct;11(4):476-85.

Human embryonic stem cells: towards therapies for cardiac disease. Derivation of 
a Dutch human embryonic stem cell line.

van de Stolpe A(1), van den Brink S, van Rooijen M, Ward-van Oostwaard D, van
Inzen W, Slaper-Cortenbach I, Fauser B, van den Hout N, Weima S, Passier R, Smith
N, Denning C, Mummery C.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Cell transplantation is being discussed as a potential therapy for multiple
disorders caused by loss or malfunction of single or at most a few cell types.
These include diabetes, Parkinson's disease and myocardial infarction or cardiac 
failure. However, it is not yet clear whether cells from adult tissues ('adult
stem cells') or embryos ('embryonic stem cells') will prove to be the most
appropriate replacement cells; most likely, each disease will have its own
preferred source. This study presents the background to this discussion and the
current state of research in replacement of cardiac tissue, with focus on recent 
developments using human embryonic stem cells. It also describes a new human
embryonic stem cell (HESC) line, NL-HESC1, the first to be derived in the
Netherlands, and shows that it forms cardiac cells in a manner comparable with
that of hES2 and hES3 cells grown in the same laboratory.

PMID: 16274613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Int J Mol Med. 2004 Oct;14(4):747-51.

Identification and characterization of human HESL, rat Hesl and rainbow trout
hesl genes in silico.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Activation of Notch signaling pathway leads to nuclear translocation of Notch
intracellular domain (NIC), and transcriptional activation of target genes
through the interaction between CSL proteins (RBPSUH or RBPSUHL) and NIC. HES1,
HES5, HEY1 and HEY2 are Notch target genes. Mammalian HES/HEY family proteins as 
well as Drosophila Hairy and Enhancer of split are implicated in the cell fate
determination. We have previously identified and characterized human HES2, HES3
and HES5 genes. Here, we identified and characterized human HES-like (HESL), rat 
Fesl, and rainbow trout fesl genes by using bioinformatics. Human HESL gene,
located within AC093824.3 genome sequence, was mapped to human chromosome 4q35.1 
between ACSL1 and SLC25A4 genes. Rat Fesl gene, located within AC111303.4 genome 
sequence, was mapped to rat chromosome 16q11. EST BX875070.2 was the
representative rainbow trout fesl cDNA. HESL-ACSL1 locus was conserved among
human, rat, mouse, and zebrafish genomes. Human HESL (241 aa) showed 92.9%
total-amino-acid identity with rat Hesl (240 aa), 92.1% total-amino-acid identity
with mouse Hesl (240 aa), and 68.0% total-amino-acid identity with rainbow trout 
hesl (235 aa). HESL orthologs consist of basic Helix-loop-helix (bHLH) domain and
ORANGE domain. C-terminal region of HESL orthologs were divergent from that of
HES, HEY, and DEC homologs. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that bHLH
transcription factors with ORANGE domain were classified into the following three
groups: (group I) HES1, HES2, HES4 and HES6 orthologs; (group II) HESL, HES5,
HES7, HEY1, HEY2 and HEYL orthologs; (group III) HES3, DEC1/BHLHB2 and
DEC2/BHLHB3 orthologs.

PMID: 15375612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Int J Oncol. 2004 Aug;25(2):529-34.

Identification and characterization of human HES2, HES3, and HES5 genes in
silico.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan.

MMTV induces the mouse mammary tumor through the dysregulation of Notch, Wnt, or 
Fgf signaling pathway. Activation of Notch signaling pathway leads to
transcriptional activation of Hes family genes through the interaction between
Notch intracellular domain and RBPSUH (CSL). Hes family proteins are mammalian
homologs of Drosophila Hairy and Enhancer of split. Hes family of transcriptional
repressors with basic Helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and Orange domains are implicated
in the cell fate determination of stem cells (or precursor cells) by suppressing 
the expression of tissue-specific transcriptional activators. Human HES1, HES4,
HES6, and HES7 genes have been reported by other groups. Here, we identified and 
characterized human HES2, HES3 and HES5 genes by using bioinformatics. FLJ33803
(AK091122.1) was the representative human HES2 cDNA. HES2 gene, encoding a 173-aa
protein, was located within human genome sequence AL031848.11. HES3 gene,
encoding a 186-aa protein, was identified within human genome sequence
AL031847.17. HES5 gene, encoding a 166-aa protein, was identified within human
genome sequence AL139246.20. HES2 and HES3 genes were mapped to human chromosome 
1p36.31, while HES5 gene to 1p36.32. HES2 mRNA was expressed in placenta,
pancreatic cancer, colon cancer with RER, cervical cancer, and in head and neck
tumors. HES5 mRNA was expressed in fetal heart, and brain tumors. Human HES
family proteins were found consisting of bHLH, Orange, Proline-rich domains, and 
WRPW motif. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that HES family proteins were
distantly related except a paralog pair of HES1 and HES4. HES family genes are
pharmacogenomic targets in the field of regenerative medicine and oncology.

PMID: 15254753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biol Reprod. 2003 Dec;69(6):2007-14. Epub 2003 Aug 20.

Establishment and maintenance of human embryonic stem cells on STO, a permanently
growing cell line.

Park JH(1), Kim SJ, Oh EJ, Moon SY, Roh SI, Kim CG, Yoon HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stem Cell Biology, Medical Research Center, MizMedi Hospital,
Kangseo-ku, Seoul 157-280, Korea.

Human embryonic stem (hES) cells have been traditionally cultured on primary
mouse embryonic fibroblasts (PMEFs). However, though STO cells have some
advantages over PMEFs and human embryonic fibroblasts (hEFs) as feeder cells,
they have never been used as feeder cells to establish hES cell lines. In this
study, three hES cell lines (Miz-hES1, Miz-hES2, and Miz-hES3) were established
from inner cell masses (ICM), using STO as feeder cells. The three hES cell lines
had normal karyotypes and expressed high levels of alkaline phosphatase (AP),
cell surface markers (SSEA-3, SSEA-4, TRA-1-60, and TRA-1-81), and transcription 
factor Oct-4. After culture on STO cells for 2 yr, hES cells maintained the
potential to form derivatives of all three embryonic germ layers. Our results
show that STO feeder cells have the potential to support the establishment and
maintenance of hES cell lines. In addition, our results suggest that laminin may 
play an important role in maintaining the undifferentiated proliferation of hES
cells.

PMID: 12930726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Development. 2002 Nov;129(21):5029-40.

Modulation of the notch signaling by Mash1 and Dlx1/2 regulates sequential
specification and differentiation of progenitor cell types in the subcortical
telencephalon.

Yun K(1), Fischman S, Johnson J, Hrabe de Angelis M, Weinmaster G, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, LPPI, University of California, San Francisco, 401 Parnassus, Box
0984, 94143-0984, USA.

Notch signaling has a central role in cell fate specification and
differentiation. We provide evidence that the Mash1 (bHLH) and Dlx1 and Dlx2
(homeobox) transcription factors have complementary roles in regulating Notch
signaling, which in turn mediates the temporal control of subcortical
telencephalic neurogenesis in mice. We defined progressively more mature
subcortical progenitors (P1, P2 and P3) through their combinatorial expression of
MASH1 and DLX2, as well as the expression of proliferative and postmitotic cell
markers at E10.5-E11.5. In the absence of Mash1, Notch signaling is greatly
reduced and 'early' VZ progenitors (P1 and P2) precociously acquire SVZ
progenitor (P3) properties. Comparing the molecular phenotypes of the delta-like 
1 and Mash1 mutants, suggests that Mash1 regulates early neurogenesis through
Notch-and Delta-dependent and -independent mechanisms. While Mash1 is required
for early neurogenesis (E10.5), Dlx1 and Dlx2 are required to downregulate Notch 
signaling during specification and differentiation steps of 'late' progenitors
(P3). We suggest that alternate cell fate choices in the developing telencephalon
are controlled by coordinated functions of bHLH and homeobox transcription
factors through their differential affects on Notch signaling.

PMID: 12397111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Sep 6;296(5):1143-7.

Genetic and physical maps of jerker (Espn(je)) on mouse chromosome 4.

Jackson T(1), Thomas J, Green ED, Noben-Trauth K.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Neurogenetics, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute 
on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, 5
Research Court, 20850, Rockville, MD, USA.

The jerker mutation causes degeneration of cochlea and vestibular sensory hair
cells in mice. A frame-shift mutation in the actin bundling gene Espin (Espn)
leads to hair bundle defects by disrupting the actin filament assembly in
stereocilia. Previously, jerker was mapped to distal mouse chromosome 4. Here,
analyzing 2536 informative meioses derived from two intersubspecific
intercrosses, we localize jerker to a 0.51+/-0.14cM interval on chromosome 4. The
following order and distances of genes and markers were determined:
D4Mit180-0.44+/-0.13cM-Hes2,
Espn(je)-0.08+/-0.06cM-D4Mit356-0.28+/-0.1cM-D4Mit208. A 300kb physical bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) contig was generated containing the Espn(je) locus.
The human homologous region maps to 1p36.31. We present a detailed
high-resolution genetic and physical map of markers located at distal chromosome 
4 and demonstrate concordance of Espn with jerker.

PMID: 12207892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Genomics. 1998 Apr 1;49(1):69-75.

Structure, chromosomal locus, and promoter of mouse Hes2 gene, a homologue of
Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split.

Nishimura M(1), Isaka F, Ishibashi M, Tomita K, Tsuda H, Nakanishi S, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Kyoto University Faculty of Medicine,
Japan.

Hes2 encodes a mammalian basic helix-loop-helix transcriptional repressor
homologous to the products of Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split. Here, we
isolated and characterized the mouse Hes2 gene. This gene consists of four exons,
and all the introns are located within the protein-coding region at positions
homologous to those of other Hes genes. On the inter-specific backcross analyses,
mouse Hes2 is mapped to the distal region of Chromosome 4 near the Hes3 and Hes5 
loci, which are different from the Hes1 locus on Chromosome 16. Upstream of the
transcription initiation site, there are GC-rich regions, but a typical TATA box 
is not present. Transient transfection analyses demonstrated that, while Hes1 and
Hes5 promoter activities are significantly upregulated by the active form of
Notch, a key regulator of cellular differentiation, Hes2 and Hes3 promoter
activities are not. These results suggest that Hes genes are functionally
classified into two groups: those that are regulated by Notch and those that are 
not.

PMID: 9570950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Eur J Biochem. 1993 Aug 1;215(3):645-52.

Molecular characterization of HES-2, a mammalian helix-loop-helix factor
structurally related to Drosophila hairy and Enhancer of split.

Ishibashi M(1), Sasai Y, Nakanishi S, Kageyama R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Kyoto University Faculty of Medicine, Japan.

Drosophila hairy (h) plays a crucial role in early development as a pair-rule
segmentation gene. h and its structurally related gene Enhancer of split [E(spl)]
are also required for normal sensory neurogenesis in late development. To analyze
the molecular mechanisms of mammalian development, we recently characterized
three rat helix-loop-helix (HLH) factors that show structural homology to the
Drosophila h and E(spl) gene products, and found that rat factors exhibit
distinct spatiotemporal expression patterns and act as a negative regulator.
Here, we report the molecular characterization of another member of this family, 
designated HES-2. Rat HES-2 protein has a basic HLH domain homologous to h and
E(spl) as well as the carboxy-terminal Trp-Arg-Pro-Trp sequence conserved among
this family. The HES-2 mRNA is present as early as embryonic day 9.5 and is
detected in a variety of tissues of both embryos and adults. DNase-I-footprinting
analyses indicate that HES-2 binds to all E box sequences (CANNTG) we tested as
well as to the N-box sequences (CACNAG). Further studies of gel-mobility-shift
assays show that HES-2 has a higher affinity for the E box than for the N box.
Transient transfection analyses suggest that HES-2 decreases the transcription
originating from the promoters containing either the E box or the N box. These
results indicate that HES-2 acts as a negative regulator through interaction with
both E-box and N-box sequences.

PMID: 8354270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


