
1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jun;42(11):7012-27. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku413. Epub 2014
May 14.

Ligand-dependent corepressor contributes to transcriptional repression by C2H2
zinc-finger transcription factor ZBRK1 through association with KRAB-associated
protein-1.

Calderon MR(1), Verway M(1), Benslama RO(2), Birlea M(3), Bouttier M(1), Dimitrov
V(1), Mader S(2), White JH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada
Institut de Recherche en Immunologie et Cancérologie (IRIC), Université de
Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada. (3)Institut de Recherche en Immunologie et
Cancérologie (IRIC), Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada. (4)Department 
of Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada Department of Medicine,
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada john.white@mcgill.ca.

We identified a novel interaction between ligand-dependent corepressor (LCoR) and
the corepressor KRAB-associated protein-1 (KAP-1). The two form a complex with
C2H2 zinc-finger transcription factor ZBRK1 on an intronic binding site in the
growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible a (GADD45A) gene and a novel site in the
fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) gene. Chromatin at both sites is enriched for
histone methyltransferase SETDB1 and histone 3 lysine 9 trimethylation, a
repressive epigenetic mark. Depletion of ZBRK1, KAP-1 or LCoR led to elevated
GADD45A and FGF2 expression in malignant and non-malignant breast epithelial
cells, and caused apoptotic death. Loss of viability could be rescued by
simultaneous knockdowns of FGF2 and transcriptional coregulators or by blocking
FGF2 function. FGF2 was not concurrently expressed with any of the
transcriptional coregulators in breast malignancies, suggesting an inverse
correlation between their expression patterns. We propose that ZBRK1, KAP-1 and
LCoR form a transcriptional complex that silences gene expression, in particular 
FGF2, which maintains breast cell viability. Given the broad expression patterns 
of both LCoR and KAP-1 during development and in the adult, this complex may have
several regulatory functions that extend beyond cell survival, mediated by
interactions with ZBRK1 or other C2H2 zinc-finger proteins.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4066800
PMID: 24829459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Anal Chem. 2014 May 20;86(10):4949-55. doi: 10.1021/ac5003728. Epub 2014 May 6.

New quantitative structure-fragmentation relationship strategy for chemical
structure identification using the calculated enthalpy of formation as a
descriptor for the fragments produced in electron ionization mass spectrometry: a
case study with tetrachlorinated biphenyls.

Dinca N(1), Dragan S, Dinca M, Sisu E, Covaci A.

Author information: 
(1)"Aurel Vlaicu" University , Arad, 310330, Romania.

Differential mass spectrometry correlated with quantum chemical calculations
(QCC-<U+0394>MS) has been shown to be an efficient tool for the chemical structure
identification (CSI) of isomers with similar mass spectra. For this type of
analysis, we report here a new strategy based on ordering (ORD), linear
correlation (LCOR) algorithms, and their coupling, to filter the most probable
structures corresponding to similar mass spectra belonging to a group with dozens
of isomers (e.g., tetrachlorinated biphenyls, TeCBs). This strategy quantifies
and compares the values of enthalpies of formation (<U+0394>(f)H) obtained by QCC for
some isobaric ions from the electron ionization (EI)-MS mass spectra, to the
corresponding relative intensities. The result of CSI is provided in the form of 
lists of decreasing probabilities calculated for all the position-isomeric
structures using the specialized software package CSI-Diff-MS Analysis 3.1.1. The
simulation of CSI with ORD, LCOR, and their coupling of six TeCBs (IUPAC no. 44, 
46, 52, 66, 74, and 77) has allowed us to find the best semiempirical
molecular-orbital methods for several of their common isobaric fragments. The
study of algorithms and strategy for the entire group of TeCBs (42 isomers) was
made with one of the optimal variants for the computation of <U+0394>(f)H using
semiempirical molecular orbital methods of HyperChem: AM1 for M(+•) and [M -
4Cl](+•) ions and RM1 for [M - Cl](+) and [M - 2Cl](+•). The analytical
performance of ORD, LCOR, and their coupling resulted from the CSI simulation of 
an analyte of known structure, using a decreasing number of isomeric standards, s
= 5, 4, 3, and 2. Compared with the results obtained by a classical library
search for TeCB isomers, the novel strategies of assigning structures of isomers 
with very similar mass spectra based on ORD, LCOR, and their coupling were much
more efficient, because they provide the correct structure at the top of the
probability list. Databases used in these CSI do not contain mass spectra, as in 
the case of a library search, but a series of <U+0394>(f)H values obtained by QCC. These
techniques are capable of relating relative intensities to the chemical
structures of analytes via <U+0394>(f)H of ions which turns out to be a good
quantitative structure-fragmentation relationship (QSFR) descriptor.

PMID: 24773183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 16;287(12):8662-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.311605. Epub 2012
Jan 25.

Ligand-dependent corepressor (LCoR) recruitment by Kruppel-like factor 6 (KLF6)
regulates expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor CDKN1A gene.

Calderon MR(1), Verway M, An BS, DiFeo A, Bismar TA, Ann DK, Martignetti JA,
Shalom-Barak T, White JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The widely expressed transcriptional coregulator, ligand-dependent corepressor
(LCoR), initially characterized as a regulator of nuclear receptor-mediated
transactivation, functions through recruitment of C-terminal binding proteins
(CtBPs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) to its N-terminal and central domains,
respectively. We performed a yeast two-hybrid screen for novel cofactors, and
identified an interaction between the C-terminal domain of LCoR and the
transcription factor Krüppel-like factor 6 (KLF6), a putative tumor suppressor in
prostate cancer. Subsequent experiments revealed LCoR regulation of several KLF6 
target genes notably p21(WAF1/CIP1) (CDKN1A) and to a lesser extent E-cadherin
(CDH1), indicating that LCoR regulates gene transcription through multiple
classes of transcription factors. In multiple cancer cells, LCoR and KLF6 bind
together on the promoters of the genes encoding CDKN1A and CDH1. LCoR contributes
to KLF6-mediated transcriptional repression in a promoter- and cell
type-dependent manner. Its inhibition of reporter constructs driven by the CDKN1A
and CDH1 promoters in PC-3 prostate carcinoma cells is sensitive to treatment
with the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A. Additionally, the LCoR cofactor CtBP1
bound the same promoters and augmented the LCoR-dependent repression in PC-3
cells. Consistent with their inferred roles in transcriptional repression,
siRNA-mediated knockdown of KLF6, LCoR, or CtBP1 in PC-3 cells induced expression
of CDKN1A and CDH1 and additional KLF6 target genes. We propose a novel model of 
LCoR function in which promoter-bound KLF6 inhibits transcription of the CDKN1A
gene and other genes as well by tethering a transcriptional corepressor complex
containing LCoR, with specific contributions by CtBP1 and HDACs.

PMCID: PMC3308733
PMID: 22277651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 28;286(43):37108-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.292771. Epub
2011 Aug 19.

Ligand-dependent corepressor acts as a novel androgen receptor corepressor,
inhibits prostate cancer growth, and is functionally inactivated by the Src
protein kinase.

Asim M(1), Hafeez BB, Siddiqui IA, Gerlach C, Patz M, Mukhtar H, Baniahmad A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2012 Jul;188(1):326.

The activated androgen receptor (AR) promotes prostate cancer (PCa) growth. AR
antagonists repress the AR by recruitment of corepressors. Not much is known
about the inactivation of AR by corepressors in the presence of agonists
(androgens). Here we show that the corepressor LCoR acts as an androgen-dependent
corepressor that represses human PCa growth in vivo. In line with this,
progressive decrease of ligand-dependent corepressor expression was observed in
the PCa TRAMP mouse model with increasing age. LCoR interacts with AR and is
recruited to chromatin in an androgen-induced manner. Unexpectedly, the LXXLL
motif of LCoR is dispensable for interaction with the AR. Rather, the data
indicate that LCoR interacts with the AR DNA binding domain on DNA.
Interestingly, the interaction of LCoR with AR is inhibited by signaling pathways
that are associated with androgen-independent PCa. Here we also show that the Src
kinase inactivates the corepressive function of LCoR. Interfering with endogenous
Src function by a dominant negative Src mutant, the growth inhibitory activity of
LCoR is enhanced in vivo in a xenograft mouse model system. Thus, our studies
indicate a role of LCoR as an AR corepressor and a tumor suppressor. Further, the
decreased expression or inactivation of LCoR is as an important step toward PCa
carcinogenesis in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3199458
PMID: 21856747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Hepatol. 2012 Jan;56(1):248-54. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2011.07.014. Epub 2011 Aug 
7.

Ligand-dependent corepressor acts as a novel corepressor of thyroid hormone
receptor and represses hepatic lipogenesis in mice.

Song Y(1), Shan S, Zhang Y, Liu W, Ding W, Ren W, Xia H, Li X, Zhang Q, Zhao L,
Li X, Yan J, Ying H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Graduate School of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Transcriptional co-regulators assist nuclear receptors to
control the transcription and maintain the metabolic homeostasis.
Ligand-dependent corepressor (LCOR) was reported to function as a transcriptional
corepressor in vitro. We found LCOR expression decreased in fatty livers of
leptin-deficient (ob/ob) mice, diet-induced obese mice, as well as patients,
suggesting LCOR may play a role in lipid homeostasis. We sought to investigate
the physiological role of LCOR in vivo and elucidate the underlining molecular
mechanisms.
METHODS: The effect of LCOR on hepatic lipid accumulation and thyroid hormone
receptor (TR) mediated expression of lipogenic genes was studied in vitro and in 
vivo.
RESULTS: Ectopic expression of LCOR via intravenous infection with LCOR
adenovirus decreased the hepatic triglyceride level in wild type, ob/ob, and
diet-induced obese mice. Interestingly, overexpression of LCOR repressed the
thyroid hormone induced expression of lipogenic genes and non-lipogenic genes,
and ameliorated hepatic steatosis in obese mice, suggesting that LCOR might
regulate lipogenesis as a novel TR corepressor. Furthermore, our study revealed
that LCOR could interact with TRß1 in the presence of the ligand, which resulted 
in competitive binding and reduced recruitment of steroid receptor
coactivator-1/3 (SRC-1/3) to the promoter region of TR target genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that LCOR is likely to suppress TRß1-mediated
hepatic lipogenesis by decreasing binding and recruitment of SRCs to TRß1. Our
study reveals the physiological function of hepatic LCOR in lipid metabolism and 
the mechanism by which LCOR regulates lipogenesis. Hepatic LCOR may be a
potential target for treating hepatic steatosis.

Copyright © 2011 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21827732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2011 Jun 1;236(6):672-80. doi: 10.1258/ebm.2011.010349.
Epub 2011 May 12.

miR-615-3p promotes the phagocytic capacity of splenic macrophages by targeting
ligand-dependent nuclear receptor corepressor in cirrhosis-related portal
hypertension.

Jiang A(1), Zhang S, Li Z, Liang R, Ren S, Li J, Pu Y, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Xi’an
Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China.

Hypersplenism is a condition in which the spleen is overactive. It is common in
patients with cirrhosis-related portal hypertension. The over-activated
hemophagocytic splenic macrophages are an important cause of hypersplenism.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are 21-22 nt single-stranded RNAs expressed endogenously,
which play important roles in many diseases. We have found by microarray,
previously, that miR-615-3p is highly expressed in splenic macrophages of
hypersplenism. In this study, we found that miR-615-3p enhanced the phagocytic
capacity of splenic macrophages. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that
ligand-dependent nuclear receptor corepressor (LCoR) was a potential
phagocytosis-related target of miR-615-3p. This was proved by dual luciferase
assay and Western blot in THP-1 cells and normal/hypersplenisum splenic
macrophages. Our results showed that the presence of miR-615-3p repressed the
expression of LCoR, a derepressor of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>), which has been confirmed to be able to promote the phagocytic
capacity of macrophages. In conclusion, high expression of miR-615-3p in
over-activated splenic macrophages depresses LCoR expression, low level of LCoR
derepresses the expression of PPAR<U+03B3> and finally upregulated PPAR<U+03B3> enhances the
phagocytic capacity of splenic macrophages. This finding might be useful in the
study of hypersplenism and other macrophage-associated diseases.

PMID: 21565892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Eur J Radiol. 2011 Dec;80(3):e531-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2010.12.062. Epub 2011 
Feb 18.

Tracheal morphology and collapse in COPD: correlation with CT indices and
pulmonary function test.

Lee HJ(1), Seo JB, Chae EJ, Kim N, Lee CW, Oh YM, Lee SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology and Research Institute of Radiology, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 388-1, Pungnap-dong, Songpa-gu,
Seoul 138-736, Republic of Korea. wberry@naver.com

OBJECTIVES: To assess the tracheal morphologic changes using CT in COPD (chronic 
obstructive lung disease) patients and to assess correlation between them and PFT
(pulmonary function test) and CT parameters.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Ninety-two healthy individuals and 115 patients with COPD 
who underwent volumetric inspiration/expiration CT scanning were included. The
Lsag, Lcor, and the tLA were measured. The TI was defined as the ratio of
Lcor/Lsag. The tracheal morphologic changes (tLA, TI, and collapsibility) were
compared in healthy individuals and COPD. In COPD patients, correlation of the
tracheal morphologic change with PFT and CT parameters was assessed.
RESULTS: The TIs in the COPD patients were significantly lower than those in the 
control group (0.80±0.15 vs. 0.88±0.11, Mean±SD) (p<0.01). In COPD patients, TI
correlated with FEV1 (r=0.29, p=<0.01), FEV1/FVC (r=0.26, p<0.01), and the GOLD
stage (r=-0.26, p<0.01). TI showed significant correlation with EI on both
inspiration and expiration CT (r=-0.19, p=0.04 and r=-0.23, p=0.02), MLD on
expiration CT (r=0.27, p<0.01), CT-ATI (r=0.34, p<0.01), and with LV on
expiration CT (r=-0.25, p<0.01).
CONCLUSION: Among the tracheal morphologic changes, the most significant change
in COPD patients compared with that in the control group, was the TI. In COPD
patients, the tracheal morphologic change showed clinically significant
correlation with severity of emphysema and CT indices.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 21315531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 30;284(44):30275-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.051201. Epub
2009 Sep 10.

Ligand-dependent corepressor LCoR is an attenuator of progesterone-regulated gene
expression.

Palijan A(1), Fernandes I, Verway M, Kourelis M, Bastien Y, Tavera-Mendoza LE,
Sacheli A, Bourdeau V, Mader S, White JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

Ligand-dependent corepressor LCoR interacts with the progesterone receptor (PR)
and estrogen receptor ERalpha in the presence of hormone. LCoR contains tandem
N-terminal PXDLS motifs that recruit C-terminal-binding protein (CtBP)
corepressors as well as a C-terminal helix-turn-helix (HTH) domain. Here, we
analyzed the function of these domains in coregulation of PR- and
ERalpha-regulated gene expression. LCoR and CtBP1 colocalize in nuclear bodies
that also contain CtBP-interacting protein CtIP and polycomb group repressor
complex marker BMI1. Coexpression of CtBP1 in MCF7 or T47D breast cancer cells
augmented corepression by LCoR, whereas coexpression of CtIP did not, consistent 
with direct interaction of LCoR with CtBP1, but not CtIP. The N-terminal region
containing the PXDLS motifs is necessary and sufficient for CTBP1 recruitment and
essential for full corepression. However, LCoR function was also strongly
dependent on the helix-turn-helix domain, as its deletion completely abolished
corepression. LCoR, CtBP, and CtIP were recruited to endogenous PR- and
ERalpha-stimulated genes in a hormone-dependent manner. Similarly, LCoR was
recruited to estrogen-repressed genes, whereas hormone treatment reduced CtBP1
binding. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of LCoR or CtBP1 augmented
expression of progesterone- and estrogen-stimulated reporter genes as well as
endogenous progesterone-stimulated target genes. In contrast, their ablation had 
gene-specific effects on ERalpha-regulated transcription that generally led to
reduced gene expression. Taken together, these results show that multiple domains
contribute to LCoR function. They also reveal a role for LCoR and CtBP1 as
attenuators of progesterone-regulated transcription but suggest that LCoR and
CtBP1 can act to enhance transcription of some genes.

PMCID: PMC2781583
PMID: 19744932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 30;284(44):30264-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.045526. Epub
2009 Sep 10.

Function of histone deacetylase 6 as a cofactor of nuclear receptor coregulator
LCoR.

Palijan A(1), Fernandes I, Bastien Y, Tang L, Verway M, Kourelis M,
Tavera-Mendoza LE, Li Z, Bourdeau V, Mader S, Yang XJ, White JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

Ligand-dependent corepressor LCoR was identified as a protein that interacts with
the estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) ligand binding domain in a
hormone-dependent manner. LCoR also interacts directly with histone deacetylase 3
(HDAC3) and HDAC6. Notably, HDAC6 has emerged as a marker of breast cancer
prognosis. However, although HDAC3 is nuclear, HDAC6 is cytoplasmic in many
cells. We found that HDAC6 is partially nuclear in estrogen-responsive MCF7
cells, colocalizes with LCoR, represses transactivation of estrogen-inducible
reporter genes, and augments corepression by LCoR. In contrast, no repression was
observed upon HDAC6 expression in COS7 cells, where it is exclusively
cytoplasmic. LCoR binds to HDAC6 in vitro via a central domain, and repression by
LCoR mutants lacking this domain was attenuated. Kinetic chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed hormone-dependent recruitment of LCoR to
promoters of ERalpha-induced target genes in synchrony with ERalpha. HDAC6 was
also recruited to these promoters, and repeat chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments confirmed the corecruitment of LCoR with ERalpha and with HDAC6.
Remarkably, however, although we find evidence for corecruitment of LCoR and
ERalpha on genes repressed by the receptor, LCoR and HDAC6 failed to
coimmunoprecipitate, suggesting that they are part of distinct complexes on these
genes. Although small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of LCoR or HDAC6
augmented expression of an estrogen-sensitive reporter gene in MCF7 cells,
unexpectedly their ablation led to reduced expression of some endogenous estrogen
target genes. Taken together, these data establish that HDAC6 can function as a
cofactor of LCoR but suggest that they may act in enhance expressing some target 
genes.

PMCID: PMC2781582
PMID: 19744931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Int J Cancer. 2008 Jul 1;123(1):66-72. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23480.

Estrogen-mediated downregulation of CD24 in breast cancer cells.

Kaipparettu BA(1), Malik S, Konduri SD, Liu W, Rokavec M, van der Kuip H, Hoppe
R, Hammerich-Hille S, Fritz P, Schroth W, Abele I, Das GM, Oesterreich S, Brauch 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Mechanisms of Origin and Treatment of Breast Cancer, Dr.
Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany.
kaippare@bcm.edu

We have previously reported on the relevance of the prevalence of
CD44(+)/CD24(-/low) cells in primary breast tumors. To study regulation of CD24, 
we queried a number of publicly available expression array studies in breast
cancer cells and found that CD24 was downregulated upon estrogen treatment. We
confirmed this estrogen-mediated repression of CD24 mRNA by quantitative
real-time PCR in MCF7, T47D and ZR75-1 cells. Repression was also seen at the
protein level as measured by flow cytometry. CD24 was not downregulated in the ER
alpha negative MDA-MB-231 cells suggesting that ER alpha was necessary. This was 
further confirmed by ER alpha silencing in MCF7 cells resulting in increased CD24
levels and by reintroduction of ER alpha into C4-12 cells resulting in decreased 
CD24 levels. Estrogen treatment did not alter half-life of CD24 mRNA and new
protein synthesis was not essential for repression, suggesting a primary
transcriptional effect. Histone deacetylase inhibition by Trichostatin A
completely abolished the repression, but decrease of the ER alpha corepressors
NCoR, LCoR, RIP140, silencing mediator of retinoid and thyroid hormone receptors,
SAFB1 and SAFB2 by siRNA or overexpression of SAFB2, NCoR and silencing mediator 
of retinoid and thyroid hormone receptors had no effect. In silico promoter
analyses led to the identification of two estrogen responsive elements in the
CD24 promoter, one of which was able to bind ER alpha as shown by electrophoretic
mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Together, our
results show that CD24 is repressed by estrogen and that this repression is a
direct transcriptional effect depending on ER alpha and histone deacetylases.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2587263
PMID: 18404683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. JSLS. 2007 Jan-Mar;11(1):76-80.

Laparoscopic versus open right hemicolectomy for carcinoma of the colon.

Tong DK(1), Law WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Hong Kong Medical Centre, Queen Mary
Hospital, Hong Kong.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to compare the outcomes of laparoscopic resection
(LR) with open resection (OR) for right-sided colon cancer.
METHODS: During the study period from June 2000 to December 2004, 182 patients
(84 men) underwent elective resection for cancer of the right colon. Laparoscopic
resection was performed in 77 patients, while 105 patients had open operations.
Patients who underwent operations on an emergency basis were excluded. Data on
the patients' demographics, operative details, and postoperative complications
were collected prospectively. The outcomes of patients with laparoscopic
resection were compared with those of patients with open surgery.
RESULTS: There was no difference in the age, sex, presence of premorbid medical
conditions, and blood loss between the 2 groups. The mean operative time for open
resection was 115.4 minutes and that for laparoscopic resection was 165.1 minutes
(P<0.001). Among the 77 patients who underwent laparoscopic resection, 7 (9%)
required conversion to an open operation. There was no difference in
postoperative surgically related complications including wound infection,
leakage, intestinal obstruction, postoperative ileus. Nonsurgical-related
complications were also similar. The median time to resumption of a normal diet
was 3 days and 4 days in the laparoscopic and open groups, respectively. The
median hospital stay in patients with laparoscopic resection was significantly
shorter than in patients with open surgery (6.0 days vs 7.0 days, P<0.001). The
2-year overall survival rates were 74% in both groups (P=0.904). In the converted
to open (LCOR) group, the hospital stay was significantly longer (LR vs OR vs
LCOR, 5.5 days vs 7.0 days vs 9.0 days respectively, P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Laparoscopic right hemicolectomy is a safe option for cancers of the 
right colon. It is associated with a shorter hospital stay and earlier resumption
of a normal diet. Mortality and morbidity are similar to that with the open
approach. There is no compromise in the survival of patients.

PMCID: PMC3015791
PMID: 17651561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2007 Sep 15;223(3):288-98. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Corepressors of agonist-bound nuclear receptors.

Gurevich I(1), Flores AM, Aneskievich BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Pharmacology/Toxicology, Department of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA.

Nuclear receptors (NRs) rely on coregulator proteins to modulate transcription of
target genes. NR coregulators can be broadly subdivided into coactivators which
potentiate transcription and corepressors which silence gene expression. The
prevailing view of coregulator action holds that in the absence of agonist the
receptor interacts with a corepressor via the corepressor nuclear receptor
(CoRNR, "corner") box motifs within the corepressor. Upon agonist binding, a
conformational change in the receptor causes the shedding of corepressor and the 
binding of a coactivator which interacts with the receptor via NR boxes within
the coregulator. This view was challenged with the discovery of RIP140 which acts
as a NR corepressor in the presence of agonist and utilizes NR boxes. Since then 
a number of other corepressors of agonist-bound NRs have been discovered. Among
them are LCoR, PRAME, REA, MTA1, NSD1, and COPR1 Although they exhibit a great
diversity of structure, mechanism of repression and pathophysiological function, 
these corepressors frequently have one or more NR boxes and often recruit histone
deacetylases to exert their repressive effects. This review highlights these more
recently discovered corepressors and addresses their potential functions in
transcription regulation, disease pharmacologic responses and xenobiotic
metabolism.

PMCID: PMC2148130
PMID: 17628626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cancer Res. 2005 Sep 1;65(17):7856-65.

Benzodithiophenes potentiate differentiation of acute promyelocytic leukemia
cells by lowering the threshold for ligand-mediated corepressor/coactivator
exchange with retinoic acid receptor alpha and enhancing changes in
all-trans-retinoic acid-regulated gene expression.

Xu K(1), Guidez F, Glasow A, Chung D, Petrie K, Stegmaier K, Wang KK, Zhang J,
Jing Y, Zelent A, Waxman S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hemato-Oncology, Institute of Cancer Research, London, United
Kingdom.

Differentiation induction is an effective therapy for acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL), which dramatically responds to all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA).
Recent studies have indicated that combinatorial use of retinoid and nonretinoid 
compounds, such as histone deacetylase inhibitors, arsenics, and PKA agonists,
has higher therapeutic value in this disease and potentially in other
malignancies. In a screen of 370 compounds, we identified benzodithiophene
analogues as potent enhancers of ATRA-induced APL cell differentiation. These
effects were not associated with changes in global histone acetylation and, for
the most potent compounds, were exerted at very low nanomolar concentrations, and
were paralleled by enhancement of some, but not all, ATRA-modulated gene
expressions. Investigating the mechanism underlying the effects of these drugs on
ATRA-induced APL cell differentiation, we have shown that benzodithiophenes
enhance ATRA-mediated dissociation and association of corepressor N-CoR and
coactivator p300 acetyltransferase, respectively, with retinoic acid receptor
(RAR) alpha proteins. These data suggest that benzodithiophenes act at the level 
of receptor activation, possibly by affecting posttranslational modification of
the receptor (and/or coregulators), thus leading to an enhancement in
ATRA-mediated effects on gene expression and APL cell differentiation. Given the 
specificities of these low benzodithiophene concentrations for PML-RARalpha and
RARalpha, these drugs may be useful for combinatorial differentiation therapy of 
APL and possibly other acute myelogenous leukemia subtypes in which the overall
ATRA signaling is suppressed.

PMID: 16140955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Vitam Horm. 2004;68:123-43.

Corepressor recruitment by agonist-bound nuclear receptors.

White JH(1), Fernandes I, Mader S, Yang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, McGill University, McIntyre Medical Sciences Bldg,
Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

Members of the nuclear receptor superfamily are ligand-regulated transcription
factors that are composed of a series of conserved domains. These receptors are
targets of a wide range of lipophilic signaling molecules that modulate many
aspects of physiology and metabolism. Binding of cognate ligands to receptors
induces a conformational change in the ligand binding domain (LBD) that creates a
pocket for recruitment of coregulatory proteins, which are essential for
ligand-dependent regulation of transcription. Several coregulatory proteins that 
interact with hormone-bound receptors contain characteristic helical LXXLL
motifs, known as nuclear receptor (NR) boxes. Generally, ligand binding to
receptors is associated with activation of transcription, and most of the NR
box-containing proteins characterized to date are coactivators. However, a full
understanding of the function of hormone-bound receptors must also incorporate
their recruitment of corepressors. The recent identification of ligand-dependent 
corepressor (LCoR) is a case in point. LCoR contains a single NR box that
mediates its hormone-dependent interaction with several nuclear receptors. It
functions as a molecular scaffold that recruits several proteins that function in
transcriptional repression. Remarkably, although the two proteins share only very
limited homology, LCoR and another NR box-containing corepressor RIP140 recruit
similar cofactors implicated in transcriptional repression, suggesting many
parallels in their mechanisms of action. Corepressors such as LCoR and RIP140 may
function in negative feedback loops to attenuate hormone-induced transactivation,
act more transiently as part of a cycle of cofactors recruited to target
promoters by ligand-bound receptors, or function in hormone-induced target gene
repression.

PMID: 15193453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Dent Child (Chic). 2003 Jan-Apr;70(1):65-70.

A clinical study of the "open sandwich" technique in pediatric dental practice.

Cannon ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dentistry, Department of Clinical Surgery, Northwestern University
Medical School, Chicago, USA. markcannon@attbi.com

PURPOSE: This study evaluated the clinical efficacy of the "open sandwich"
restoration for pediatric dental practice.
METHODS: Three pediatric dentists used a standardized preparation and restorative
technique to place the restorations. The prepared tooth was etched with a
phosphoric acid semigel and rinsed. A resin modified glass ionomer (Fuji II LCor 
Photac-Fil) was placed short of the margins and then light cured. The resin
modified glass ionomer was covered with an occlusal layer of a microhybrid
flowable composite (Aeliteflo or Flow-it). The same preparation for the
experimental restorations was used for the control conventional amalgam (Tytin)
restorations. The restorations were evaluated at 6-month intervals and ranked
with a modified United States Public Heath Survey (USPHS) scale as follows: Alfa:
No discernible marginal opening or stain; Beta: Slight opening of margin
discernible with dental explorer, but without stain; Charlie: Open margin and
stain; Delta: Recurrent caries or restoration failure. Restoration failures were 
categorized according to etiology, pulpal necrosis, bruxism, marginal leakage,
isthmus fracture, or adhesive failure.
RESULTS: All recalled experimental restorations, except 8, were rated as either
Alpha or Beta. Six failed due to isthmus fracture and 2 due to pulpal necrosis.
Fifteen restorations had delaminating of the flowable composite from the resin
modified glass ionomer. The use of the "open sandwich" technique compared
favorably with a similar study using adhesive amalgam restorations.
CONCLUSIONS: The "open sandwich" technique can be successfully used in a
pediatric dental practice.

PMID: 12762613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Cell Biol. 2003 Apr 28;161(2):223-8.

Active repression by unliganded retinoid receptors in development: less is
sometimes more.

Weston AD(1), Blumberg B, Underhill TM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, 1441 N. 34th St., Seattle, WA 98103, USA.
aweston@systemsbiology.org

The retinoid receptors have major roles throughout development, even in the
absence of ligand. Here, we summarize an emerging theme whereby gene repression, 
mediated by unliganded retinoid receptors, can dictate cell fate. In addition to 
activating transcription, retinoid receptors actively repress gene transcription 
by recruiting cofactors that promote chromatin compaction. Two developmental
processes for which gene silencing by the retinoid receptors is essential are
head formation in Xenopus and skeletal development in the mouse. Inappropriate
repression, by oncogenic retinoic acid (RA)**Abbreviations used in this paper:
APL, acute promyelocytic leukemia; dnRARalpha, dominant-negative version of the
RARalpha; E, embryonic age; HDAC, histone deacetylase; LCoR, ligand-dependent
corepressor; NCoR, nuclear receptor corepressor; RA, retinoic acid; RAR, RA
receptor; RARE, RXR homodimer bound to bipartite response element; RXR, retinoid 
X receptor; TSA, trichostatin A; CYP26, cytochrome p450, 26; TR, thyroid hormone 
receptor. receptor (RAR) fusion proteins, blocks myeloid differentiation leading 
to a rare form of leukemia. Our current understanding of the developmental role
of retinoid repression and future perspectives in this field are discussed.

PMCID: PMC2172895
PMID: 12719467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cell. 2003 Jan;11(1):139-50.

Ligand-dependent nuclear receptor corepressor LCoR functions by histone
deacetylase-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

Fernandes I(1), Bastien Y, Wai T, Nygard K, Lin R, Cormier O, Lee HS, Eng F,
Bertos NR, Pelletier N, Mader S, Han VK, Yang XJ, White JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1Y6.

LCoR (ligand-dependent corepressor) is a transcriptional corepressor widely
expressed in fetal and adult tissues that is recruited to agonist-bound nuclear
receptors through a single LXXLL motif. LCoR binding to estrogen receptor alpha
depends in part on residues in the coactivator binding pocket distinct from those
bound by TIF-2. Repression by LCoR is abolished by histone deacetylase inhibitor 
trichostatin A in a receptor-dependent fashion, indicating HDAC-dependent and
-independent modes of action. LCoR binds directly to specific HDACs in vitro and 
in vivo. Moreover, LCoR functions by recruiting C-terminal binding protein
corepressors through two consensus binding motifs and colocalizes with CtBPs in
the nucleus. LCoR represents a class of corepressor that attenuates
agonist-activated nuclear receptor signaling by multiple mechanisms.

PMID: 12535528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Contemp Longterm Care. 1999 Dec;22(12):53.

Telecare brings doctors and residents together.

Gold DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)LCOR Senior Living, McLean, Virginia, USA.

PMID: 10977332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Gene. 1999 Mar 18;229(1-2):229-35.

A plasmid-encoded two-component regulatory system involved in copper-inducible
transcription in Lactococcus lactis.

Khunajakr N(1), Liu CQ, Charoenchai P, Dunn NW.

Author information: 
(1)Cooperative Research Centre for Food Industry Innovation, Department of
Biotechnology, University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia.

Two regulatory genes (lcoR and lcoS) were identified from a plasmid-borne
lactococcal copper resistance determinant and characterized by transcriptional
fusion to the promoterless chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene (cat). RT-PCR
analysis indicates that lcoR and lcoS are organized within an operon, controlling
the transcription of cat in a copper-inducible manner. The amino acid sequences
deduced from lcoR and lcoS show homology to the response and sensor proteins of
known two-component regulatory systems. Deletion within either lcoS or both genes
inactivated the copper-dependent activity, suggesting the presence of no
trans-acting lcoR and lcoS homologs in the lactococcal host chromosome. The
transcription start site involved in copper induction was mapped by primer
extension.

PMID: 10095123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 1991 Aug;43(4):322-9.

[Measurement of central motor conduction time (CMCT) in healthy Chinese
subjects].

[Article in Chinese]

Ni YQ(1), Teng GX.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurophysiology, China Medical University, Shemyang.

Transcutaneous electrical stimulation of the central nervous system was used to
measure CMCT between the human cerebral cortex and spinal cord. 64 normal
volunteers (46 healthy adult males and 18 females, age of 20-67 years, body
height of 156-185 cm) were recruited as experimental subjects. Action potentials 
of muscles were recorded from upper limb (Thenar) and lower limb (Muscle tibialis
anterior) following cortical and spinal stimulation. The cortical and spinal
latent periods (Lcor., Lsp.) were measured and CMCT was obtained by subtracting
Lsp. from Lcor. for each muscle. The CMCT between the cerebral cortex and the
first thoracic (Th1) cord was 6.69 +/- 1.48 ms, while that between the cerebral
cortex and the first lumber (L1) cord was 12.90 +/- 1.59 ms. Statistical analysis
indicated that CMCT was not related to sex, age, body height and left or right
side of the body as well. The motor conduction velocity in spinal cord (MCVsp)
between Th1 and L1, [distance (Th1 to L1)/CMCT (Muscle tibialis anterior)-CMCT
(Thenar)] was found to be 71.34 +/- 10.89 m/s, which corresponds to the
conduction velocity of the large fibers in the pyramidal tract. The results of
the present study are valuable in diagnosis and prognosis of motor system
diseases in CNS.

PMID: 1754899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Eur Neurol. 1990;30(1):14-8.

Magneto-electrical stimulation of central motor pathways compared with
percutaneous electrical stimulation.

Ugawa Y(1), Kohara N, Shimpo T, Mannen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Japan.

The central motor conduction to the relaxed muscles was studied in 30 normal
volunteers using magneto-electrical stimulation (MES) of the central motor
pathways. The results were compared with those obtained by the percutaneous
electrical stimulation technique (PES) described previously. None of the cortical
and spinal latencies (Lcor and Lsp, respectively) and the central motor
conduction time were different between MES and PES in the upper limb muscles. In 
some lower limb muscles, however, the Lsps of MES were significantly shorter than
those of PES. This was probably because the magnetic stimulation over the lumbar 
spinal column activated the motor roots at their exit from the spinal canal
rather than the level of conus medullaris, at which activation occurs in the
electrical stimulation.

PMID: 2298221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1989 Jan;29(1):8-12.

[Magneto-electrical stimulation (MES)--compared with percutaneous electrical
stimulation (PES)].

[Article in Japanese]

Ugawa Y, Kohara N, Shimpo T, Mannen T.

The central motor conduction was studied in 30 normal volunteers using a recently
developed magneto-electrical stimulation technique (MES). The results were
compared with those obtained by percutaneous electrical stimulation technique
(PES) described previously. We made a magnetic stimulator similar to that of
Barker et al. To stimulate the motor cortex, the magnetic coil was placed over
the head. It was placed over the seventh cervical spinous process (C7) for
cervical stimulation, and the first lumbar spinous process (L1) for lumbar
stimulation. Cortical stimulation was performed when the subjects were at rest,
and also at during weak voluntary contraction in some of them. Recordings were
made from the deltoid (Del), biceps brachii (Bi), extensor carpi radialis (ECR), 
thenar, quadriceps femoris (Quad), tibialis anterior (TA) and flexor hallucis
brevis (FHB) muscles with a pair of surface electrodes. The cortical and spinal
latent periods (Lcor and Lsp, respectively) were measured. The central conduction
time (CCT) was obtained by subtracting Lsp from Lcor for each muscle. In all
subjects, responses were readily obtained by cortical, cervical and lumbar
stimulations without discomfort in all the muscles examined. The cortical
responses with amplitudes of more than 1mV could be recorded even in the lower
limb muscles. There were no significant differences in Lsp and CCT between MES
and PES, in all the upper limb muscles examined. The Lcors of the lower limb
muscles obtained by MES were not different from those obtained by PES. However,
the Lsps obtained by MES were significantly shorter than those by PES in the Quad
and TA muscles.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2743687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Eur Neurol. 1989;29(3):135-40.

Physiologic analysis of central motor pathways--simultaneous recording from
multiple relaxed muscles.

Ugawa Y(1), Genba K, Shimpo T, Mannen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Japan.

The central motor pathways were studied with the technique of percutaneous
electrical stimulation of the central nervous system in 40 normal volunteers.
There were no significant differences between the right and left sides, or
between males and females. A linear correlation between the cortical latency
(Lcor) or the spinal latency (Lsp) and body height was observed, however, there
was no correlation between the central conduction time (CCT) (Lcor-Lsp) and body 
height. Consequently, the CCT appears to provide a reliable estimate of the
function of central motor pathways. We have established normal values for eight
muscles at rest that would be required for localizing a very small intraspinal
lesion.

PMID: 2731560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


