
1. Front Neuroanat. 2015 Oct 27;9:136. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00136. eCollection
2015.

LIM homeobox protein 5 (Lhx5) is essential for mamillary body development.

Miquelajáuregui A(1), Sandoval-Schaefer T(1), Martínez-Armenta M(2),
Pérez-Martínez L(2), Cárabez A(1), Zhao Y(3), Heide M(4), Alvarez-Bolado G(4),
Varela-Echavarría A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Neurobiología del Desarrollo y Neurofisiología, Instituto de
Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México Querétaro, Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio de Neuroinmunobiología, Departamento de Medicina Molecular y
Bioprocesos, Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México 
Cuernavaca, Mexico. (3)Program on Genomics of Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD, USA. (4)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
University of Heidelberg Heidelberg, Germany.

The mamillary body (MM) is a group of hypothalamic nuclei related to memory and
spatial navigation that interconnects hippocampal, thalamic, and tegmental
regions. Here we demonstrate that Lhx5, a LIM-HD domain transcription factor
expressed early in the developing posterior hypothalamus, is required for the
generation of the MM and its derived tracts. The MM markers Foxb1, Sim2, and Lhx1
are absent in Lhx5 knock-out mice from early embryonic stages, suggesting
abnormal specification of this region. This was supported by the absence of
Nkx2.1 and expansion of Shh in the prospective mamillary area. Interestingly, we 
also found an ectopic domain expressing Lhx2 and Lhx9 along the anterio-posterior
hypothalamic axis. Our results suggest that Lhx5 controls early aspects of
hypothalamic development by regulating gene expression and cellular specification
in the prospective MM.

PMCID: PMC4621302
PMID: 26578897  [PubMed]


2. Front Neuroanat. 2015 Aug 14;9:113. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00113. eCollection
2015.

Lhx5 controls mamillary differentiation in the developing hypothalamus of the
mouse.

Heide M(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhou X(1), Zhao T(2), Miquelajáuregui A(3),
Varela-Echavarría A(3), Alvarez-Bolado G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Heidelberg Heidelberg,
Germany. (2)Key Laboratory of Oral Disease and Biomedical Sciences,
Stomatological Hospital, Chongqing Medical University Chongqing, China.
(3)Departamento de Neurobiología del Desarrollo y Neurofisiología, Instituto de
Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México Querétaro, Mexico.

Acquisition of specific neuronal identity by individual brain nuclei is a key
step in brain development. However, how the mechanisms that confer neuronal
identity are integrated with upstream regional specification networks is still
mysterious. Expression of Sonic hedgehog (Shh), is required for hypothalamic
specification and is later downregulated by Tbx3 to allow for the differentiation
of the tubero-mamillary region. In this region, the mamillary body (MBO), is a
large neuronal aggregate essential for memory formation. To clarify how MBO
identity is acquired after regional specification, we investigated Lhx5, a
transcription factor with restricted MBO expression. We first generated a
hypomorph allele of Lhx5-in homozygotes, the MBO disappears after initial
specification. Intriguingly, in these mutants, Tbx3 was downregulated and the Shh
expression domain abnormally extended. Microarray analysis and chromatin
immunoprecipitation indicated that Lhx5 appears to be involved in Shh
downregulation through Tbx3 and activates several MBO-specific regulator and
effector genes. Finally, by tracing the caudal hypothalamic cell lineage we show 
that, in the Lhx5 mutant, at least some MBO cells are present but lack
characteristic marker expression. Our work shows how the Lhx5 locus contributes
to integrate regional specification pathways with downstream acquisition of
neuronal identity in the MBO.

PMCID: PMC4536661
PMID: 26321924  [PubMed]


3. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 6;10(7):e0132525. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132525.
eCollection 2015.

Conserved Noncoding Sequences Regulate lhx5 Expression in the Zebrafish
Forebrain.

Sun L(1), Chen F(1), Peng G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Brain Science, State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.

The LIM homeobox family protein Lhx5 plays important roles in forebrain
development in the vertebrates. The lhx5 gene exhibits complex temporal and
spatial expression patterns during early development but its transcriptional
regulation mechanisms are not well understood. Here, we have used transgenesis in
zebrafish in order to define regulatory elements that drive lhx5 expression in
the forebrain. Through comparative genomic analysis we identified 10 non-coding
sequences conserved in five teleost species. We next examined the enhancer
activities of these conserved non-coding sequences with Tol2 transposon mediated 
transgenesis. We found a proximately located enhancer gave rise to robust
reporter EGFP expression in the forebrain regions. In addition, we identified an 
enhancer located at approximately 50 kb upstream of lhx5 coding region that is
responsible for reporter gene expression in the hypothalamus. We also identify an
enhancer located approximately 40 kb upstream of the lhx5 coding region that is
required for expression in the prethalamus (ventral thalamus). Together our
results suggest discrete enhancer elements control lhx5 expression in different
regions of the forebrain.

PMCID: PMC4492605
PMID: 26147098  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Neurosci. 2015 Feb 11;35(6):2596-611. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2699-14.2015.

Control of axon guidance and neurotransmitter phenotype of dB1 hindbrain
interneurons by Lim-HD code.

Kohl A(1), Marquardt T(2), Klar A(3), Sela-Donenfeld D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Koret School of Veterinary Medicine, Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture,
Food and Environment, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot 76100, Israel.
(2)Developmental Neurobiology Laboratory, European Neuroscience Institute,
Göttingen 37077, Germany, and. (3)Department of Medical Neurobiology IMRIC,
Hebrew University Medical School, Jerusalem, 91120, Israel
avihu.klar@mail.huji.ac.il dalit.seladon@mail.huji.ac.il. (4)Koret School of
Veterinary Medicine, Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and
Environment, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot 76100, Israel,
avihu.klar@mail.huji.ac.il dalit.seladon@mail.huji.ac.il.

Hindbrain dorsal interneurons (HDIs) are implicated in receiving, processing,
integrating, and transmitting sensory inputs from the periphery and spinal cord, 
including the vestibular, auditory, and proprioceptive systems. During
development, multiple molecularly defined HDI types are set in columns along the 
dorsoventral axis, before migrating along well-defined trajectories to generate
various brainstem nuclei. Major brainstem functions rely on the precise assembly 
of different interneuron groups and higher brain domains into common circuitries.
Yet, knowledge regarding interneuron axonal patterns, synaptic targets, and the
transcriptional control that govern their connectivity is sparse. The dB1 class
of HDIs is formed in a district dorsomedial position along the hindbrain and
gives rise to the inferior olive nuclei, dorsal cochlear nuclei, and vestibular
nuclei. dB1 interneurons express various transcription factors (TFs): the
pancreatic transcription factor 1a (Ptf1a), the homeobox TF-Lbx1 and the
Lim-homeodomain (Lim-HD), and TF Lhx1 and Lhx5. To decipher the axonal and
synaptic connectivity of dB1 cells, we have used advanced enhancer tools combined
with conditional expression systems and the PiggyBac-mediated DNA transposition
system in avian embryos. Multiple ipsilateral and contralateral axonal
projections were identified ascending toward higher brain centers, where they
formed synapses in the Purkinje cerebellar layer as well as at discrete midbrain 
auditory and vestibular centers. Decoding the mechanisms that instruct dB1
circuit formation revealed a fundamental role for Lim-HD proteins in regulating
their axonal patterns, synaptic targets, and neurotransmitter choice. Together,
this study provides new insights into the assembly and heterogeneity of HDIs
connectivity and its establishment through the central action of Lim-HD governed 
programs.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/352596-16$15.00/0.

PMID: 25673852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Front Neuroanat. 2014 Jul 4;8:59. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2014.00059. eCollection
2014.

Combinatorial expression of Lef1, Lhx2, Lhx5, Lhx9, Lmo3, Lmo4, and Prox1 helps
to identify comparable subdivisions in the developing hippocampal formation of
mouse and chicken.

Abellán A(1), Desfilis E(1), Medina L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Brain Development and Evolution, Department of Experimental
Medicine, Institute of Biomedical Research of Lleida, University of Lleida
Lleida, Spain.

We carried out a study of the expression patterns of seven developmental
regulatory genes (Lef1, Lhx2, Lhx9, Lhx5, Lmo3, Lmo4, and Prox1), in combination 
with topological position, to identify the medial pallial derivatives, define its
major subdivisions, and compare them between mouse and chicken. In both species, 
the medial pallium is defined as a pallial sector adjacent to the cortical hem
and roof plate/choroid tela, showing moderate to strong ventricular zone
expression of Lef1, Lhx2, and Lhx9, but not Lhx5. Based on this, the hippocampal 
formation (indusium griseum, dentate gyrus, Ammon's horn fields, and subiculum), 
the medial entorhinal cortex, and part of the amygdalo-hippocampal transition
area of mouse appeared to derive from the medial pallium. In the chicken, based
on the same position and gene expression profile, we propose that the hippocampus
(including the V-shaped area), the parahippocampal area (including its
caudolateral part), the entorhinal cortex, and the amygdalo-hippocampal
transition area are medial pallial derivatives. Moreover, the combinatorial
expression of Lef1, Prox1, Lmo4, and Lmo3 allowed the identification of dentate
gyrus/CA3-like, CA1/subicular-like, and medial entorhinal-like comparable sectors
in mouse and chicken, and point to the existence of mostly conserved molecular
networks involved in hippocampal complex development. Notably, while the mouse
medial entorhinal cortex derives from the medial pallium (similarly to the
hippocampal formation, both being involved in spatial navigation and spatial
memory), the lateral entorhinal cortex (involved in processing non-spatial,
contextual information) appears to derive from a distinct dorsolateral caudal
pallial sector.

PMCID: PMC4082316
PMID: 25071464  [PubMed]


6. Dev Growth Differ. 2013 Sep;55(7):668-75. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12074. Epub 2013 Aug
30.

The expression of LIM-homeobox genes, Lhx1 and Lhx5, in the forebrain is
essential for neural retina differentiation.

Inoue J(1), Ueda Y, Bando T, Mito T, Noji S, Ohuchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytology and Histology, Okayama University Graduate School of
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama,
700-8558, Japan.

Elucidating the mechanisms underlying eye development is essential for advancing 
the medical treatment of eye-related disorders. The primordium of the eye is an
optic vesicle (OV), which has a dual potential for generation of the developing
neural retina and retinal pigment epithelium. However, the factors that regulate 
the differentiation of the retinal primordium remain unclear. We have previously 
shown that overexpression of Lhx1 and Lhx5, members of the LIM-homeobox genes,
induced the formation of a second neural retina from the presumptive pigmented
retina of the OV. However, the precise timing of Lhx1 expression required for
neural retina differentiation has not been clarified. Moreover, RNA interference 
of Lhx5 has not been previously reported. Here, using a modified electroporation 
method, we show that, Lhx1 expression in the forebrain around stage 8 is required
for neural retina formation. In addition, we have succeeded in the knockdown of
Lhx5 expression, resulting in conversion of the neural retina region to a pigment
vesicle-like tissue, which indicates that Lhx5 is also required for neural retina
differentiation, which correlates temporally with the activity of Lhx1. These
results suggest that Lhx1 and Lhx5 in the forebrain regulate neural retina
differentiation by suppressing the development of the retinal pigment epithelium,
before the formation of the OV.

© 2013 The Authors Development, Growth & Differentiation © 2013 Japanese Society 
of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 24024588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2013 Sep;296(9):1317-32. doi: 10.1002/ar.22744. Epub 2013 Jul
31.

The olfactory amygdala in amniotes: an evo-devo approach.

Abellán A(1), Desfilis E, Medina L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Brain Development and Evolution, Department of Experimental
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lleida, Institute of Biomedical
Research of Lleida, Lleida, Spain.

In tetrapods, the medial amygdala is a forebrain center that integrates olfactory
and/or vomeronasal signals with the endocrine and autonomic systems, playing a
key role in different social behaviors. The vomeronasal system has undergone
important changes during evolution, which may be behind some interspecies
differences in chemosensory-mediated social behavior. These evolutionary changes 
are associated with variations in vomeronasal-recipient brain structures,
including the medial amygdala. Herein, we employed an evolutionary developmental 
biology approach for trying to understand the function and evolution of the
medial amygdala. For that purpose, we reviewed published data on fate mapping in 
mouse, and the expression of orthologous developmental regulatory genes (Nkx2.1, 
Lhx6, Shh, Tbr1, Lhx9, Lhx5, Otp, and Pax6) in embryos of mouse, chicken, emydid 
turtles, and a pipid frog. We also analyzed novel data on Lhx9 and Otp in a
lacertid lizard. Based on distinct embryonic origin and genetic profile, at least
five neuronal subpopulations exist in the medial amygdala of rodents, expressing 
either Nkx2.1/Lhx6, Shh, Lhx9, Otp/Lhx5, or Pax6. Each neuronal subpopulation
appears involved in different functional pathways. For example, Lhx6 cells are
specifically activated by sex pheromones and project to preoptic and hypothalamic
centers involved in reproduction. Based on data in nonmammals, at least three of 
these neuronal subtypes might have been present in the medial amygdala of the
amniote common ancestor. During mammalian evolution, the downregulation of Nkx2.1
in the alar hypothalamus may have been a driving force for an increment of the
Otp/Lhx5 subpopulation.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23904411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2013 Feb 25;65(1):77-82.

[Application of confocal simultaneous scanner unit in the study of forebrain
neurodevelopment in zebrafish].

[Article in Chinese]

Shi Y(1), Gao JX, Peng G, Jiang M.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Brain Science and State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, 
Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

With the application of the photoconversion technology of genetically expressed
fluorescent proteins in biologic field, more powerful confocal imaging ability
was demanded. The aim of the present study was to establish an experimental model
employing confocal simultaneous scanner unit for simultaneous laser stimulation
and imaging, taking study of forebrain neurodevelopment in zebrafish as an
example. In the present study, 36-48-hour-old Tg(lhx5:kaede) zebrafish embryos
were mounted with 1.2% low melting temperature agarose. The forebrain neurons
marked with kaede were observed using the simultaneous scanner unit of confocal
microscopy. The 405 nm laser was used to stimulate the region of interest (ROI), 
while 488 and 559 nm lasers were used to acquire images at the same time. The
photoconversion state of kaede protein was then reviewed, and the projecting
pattern of neurons stimulated by the ultraviolet laser was examined. The results 
showed that, the fluorescence of stimulated kaede turned from green to red, and
the photoconversion of kaede demonstrated anterior dorsal telencephalon (ADt)
neurons projected axons ventrally into the anterior commissure (AC) and
supraoptic tract (SOT). These results suggest the confocal simultaneous scanner
unit meets the demand of the photoconversion experiment. The application of
confocal simultaneous scanning technology in examining Tg(lhx5:kaede) zebrafish
embryos affords an ideal experimental model in neurodevelopment study.

PMID: 23426517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biol Open. 2012 Nov 15;1(11):1083-93. doi: 10.1242/bio.20121396. Epub 2012 Aug
28.

Lhx1 in the proximal region of the optic vesicle permits neural retina
development in the chicken.

Kawaue T(1), Okamoto M, Matsuyo A, Inoue J, Ueda Y, Tomonari S, Noji S, Ohuchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Systems, Institute of Technology and Science, The
University of Tokushima Graduate School , 2-1 Minami-Josanjima-cho, Tokushima
770-8506 , Japan.

How the eye forms has been one of the fundamental issues in developmental
biology. The retinal anlage first appears as the optic vesicle (OV) evaginating
from the forebrain. Subsequently, its distal portion invaginates to form the
two-walled optic cup, which develops into the outer pigmented and inner
neurosensory layers of the retina. Recent work has shown that this optic-cup
morphogenesis proceeds as a self-organizing activity without any extrinsic
molecules. However, intrinsic factors that regulate this process have not been
elucidated. Here we show that a LIM-homeobox gene, Lhx1, normally expressed in
the proximal region of the nascent OV, induces a second neurosensory retina
formation from the outer pigmented retina when overexpressed in the chicken OV.
Lhx2, another LIM-homeobox gene supposed to be involved in early OV formation,
could not substitute this function of Lhx1, while Lhx5, closely related to Lhx1, 
could replace it. Conversely, knockdown of Lhx1 expression by RNA interference
resulted in the formation of a small or pigmented vesicle. These results suggest 
that the proximal region demarcated by Lhx1 expression permits OV development,
eventually dividing the two retinal domains.

PMCID: PMC3507191
PMID: 23213388  [PubMed]


10. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36516. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036516. Epub 2012 May 14.

Dcc regulates asymmetric outgrowth of forebrain neurons in zebrafish.

Gao J(1), Zhang C, Yang B, Sun L, Zhang C, Westerfield M, Peng G.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Brain Science and State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

The guidance receptor DCC (deleted in colorectal cancer) ortholog UNC-40
regulates neuronal asymmetry development in Caenorhabditis elegans, but it is not
known whether DCC plays a role in the specification of neuronal polarity in
vertebrates. To examine the roles of DCC in neuronal asymmetry regulation in
vertebrates, we studied zebrafish anterior dorsal telencephalon (ADt) neuronal
axons. We generated transgenic zebrafish animals expressing the photo-convertible
fluorescent protein Kaede in ADt neurons and then photo-converted Kaede to label 
specifically the ADt neuron axons. We found that ADt axons normally project
ventrally. Knock down of Dcc function by injecting antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides caused the ADt neurons to project axons dorsally. To examine the
axon projection pattern of individual ADt neurons, we labeled single ADt neurons 
using a forebrain-specific promoter to drive fluorescent protein expression. We
found that individual ADt neurons projected axons dorsally or formed multiple
processes after morpholino knock down of Dcc function. We further found that
knock down of the Dcc ligand, Netrin1, also caused ADt neurons to project axons
dorsally. Knockdown of Neogenin1, a guidance receptor closely related to Dcc,
enhanced the formation of aberrant dorsal axons in embryos injected with Dcc
morpholino. These experiments provide the first evidence that Dcc regulates
polarized axon initiation and asymmetric outgrowth of forebrain neurons in
vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC3351449
PMID: 22606267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Brain Behav Evol. 2011;78(3):216-36. doi: 10.1159/000330056. Epub 2011 Aug 23.

Contribution of genoarchitecture to understanding forebrain evolution and
development, with particular emphasis on the amygdala.

Medina L(1), Bupesh M, Abellán A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Brain Development and Evolution, Department of Experimental
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lleida, Institute of Biomedical
Research of Lleida, Spain. loreta.medina@mex.udl.cat

The amygdala is a forebrain center involved in functions and behaviors that are
critical for survival (such as control of the neuroendocrine system and
homeostasis, and reproduction and fear/escape responses) and in cognitive
functions such as attention and emotional learning. In mammals, the amygdala is
highly complex, with multiple subdivisions, neuronal subtypes, and connections,
making it very difficult to understand its functional organization and
evolutionary origin. Since evolution is the consequence of changes that occurred 
in development, herein we review developmental data based on genoarchitecture and
fate mapping in mammals (in the mouse model) and other vertebrates in order to
identify its basic components and embryonic origin in different species and
understand how they changed in evolution. In all tetrapods studied, the amygdala 
includes at least 4 components: (1) a ventral pallial part, characterized by
expression of Lhx2 and Lhx9, that includes part of the basal amygdalar complex in
mammals and a caudal part of the dorsal ventricular ridge in sauropsids and also 
produces a cell subpopulation of the medial amygdala; (2) a striatal part,
characterized by expression of Pax6 and/or Islet1, which includes the central
amygdala in different species; (3) a pallidal part, characterized by expression
of Nkx2.1 and, in amniotes, Lhx6, which includes part of the medial amygdala, and
(4) a hypothalamic part (derived from the supraoptoparaventricular domain or
SPV), characterized by Otp and/or Lhx5 expression, which produces an important
subpopulation of cells of the medial extended amygdala (medial amygdala and/or
medial bed nucleus of the stria terminalis). Importantly, the size of the SPV
domain increases upon reduction or lack of Nkx2.1 function in the hypothalamus.
It appears that Nkx2.1 expression was downregulated in the alar hypothalamus
during evolution to mammals, which may have produced an enlargement of SPV and
the amygdalar cell subpopulation derived from it.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21860224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Dev Biol. 2011 Sep 15;357(2):295-304. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.06.042. Epub 2011
Jul 18.

Identification of novel Hoxa1 downstream targets regulating hindbrain, neural
crest and inner ear development.

Makki N(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Human Genetics, UT, USA.

Hox genes play a crucial role during embryonic patterning and organogenesis. Of
the 39 Hox genes, Hoxa1 is the first to be expressed during embryogenesis and the
only anterior Hox gene linked to a human syndrome. Hoxa1 is necessary for the
proper development of the brainstem, inner ear and heart in humans and mice;
however, almost nothing is known about the molecular downstream targets through
which it exerts its function. To gain insight into the transcriptional network
regulated by this protein, we performed microarray analysis on tissue
microdissected from the prospective rhombomere 3-5 region of Hoxa1 null and wild 
type embryos. Due to the very early and transient expression of this gene,
dissections were performed on early somite stage embryos during an eight-hour
time window of development. Our array yielded a list of around 300 genes
differentially expressed between the two samples. Many of the identified genes
play a role in a specific developmental or cellular process. Some of the
validated targets regulate early neural crest induction and specification.
Interestingly, three of these genes, Zic1, Hnf1b and Foxd3, were down-regulated
in the posterior hindbrain, where cardiac neural crest cells arise, which pattern
the outflow tract of the heart. Other targets are necessary for early inner ear
development, e.g. Pax8 and Fgfr3 or are expressed in specific hindbrain neurons
regulating respiration, e.g. Lhx5. These findings allow us to propose a model
where Hoxa1 acts in a genetic cascade upstream of genes controlling specific
aspects of embryonic development, thereby providing insight into possible
mechanisms underlying the human HoxA1-syndrome.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3176680
PMID: 21784065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20197. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020197. Epub 2011 May 26.

Directed neural differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells is a sensitive
system for the identification of novel Hox gene effectors.

Bami M(1), Episkopou V, Gavalas A, Gouti M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Laboratory, Biomedical Research Foundation of the
Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece.

The evolutionarily conserved Hox family of homeodomain transcription factors
plays fundamental roles in regulating cell specification along the anterior
posterior axis during development of all bilaterian animals by controlling cell
fate choices in a highly localized, extracellular signal and cell context
dependent manner. Some studies have established downstream target genes in
specific systems but their identification is insufficient to explain either the
ability of Hox genes to direct homeotic transformations or the breadth of their
patterning potential. To begin delineating Hox gene function in neural
development we used a mouse ES cell based system that combines efficient neural
differentiation with inducible Hoxb1 expression. Gene expression profiling
suggested that Hoxb1 acted as both activator and repressor in the short term but 
predominantly as a repressor in the long run. Activated and repressed genes
segregated in distinct processes suggesting that, in the context examined, Hoxb1 
blocked differentiation while activating genes related to early developmental
processes, wnt and cell surface receptor linked signal transduction and
cell-to-cell communication. To further elucidate aspects of Hoxb1 function we
used loss and gain of function approaches in the mouse and chick embryos. We show
that Hoxb1 acts as an activator to establish the full expression domain of CRABPI
and II in rhombomere 4 and as a repressor to restrict expression of Lhx5 and
Lhx9. Thus the Hoxb1 patterning activity includes the regulation of the cellular 
response to retinoic acid and the delay of the expression of genes that commit
cells to neural differentiation. The results of this study show that ES neural
differentiation and inducible Hox gene expression can be used as a sensitive
model system to systematically identify Hox novel target genes, delineate their
interactions with signaling pathways in dictating cell fate and define the extent
of functional overlap among different Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC3102681
PMID: 21637844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Oncol. 2011 Feb;5(1):77-92. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2010.11.002. Epub 2010 Dec 
2.

DNA methylation patterns in luminal breast cancers differ from non-luminal
subtypes and can identify relapse risk independent of other clinical variables.

Kamalakaran S(1), Varadan V, Giercksky Russnes HE, Levy D, Kendall J, Janevski A,
Riggs M, Banerjee N, Synnestvedt M, Schlichting E, Kåresen R, Shama Prasada K,
Rotti H, Rao R, Rao L, Eric Tang MH, Satyamoorthy K, Lucito R, Wigler M,
Dimitrova N, Naume B, Borresen-Dale AL, Hicks JB.

Author information: 
(1)Philips Research North America, Biomedical Informatics, Briarcliff Manor, NY
10510, United States. sitharthk@philips.com

The diversity of breast cancers reflects variations in underlying biology and
affects the clinical implications for patients. Gene expression studies have
identified five major subtypes- Luminal A, Luminal B, basal-like, ErbB2+ and
Normal-Like. We set out to determine the role of DNA methylation in subtypes by
performing genome-wide scans of CpG methylation in breast cancer samples with
known expression-based subtypes. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering using a set
of most varying loci clustered the tumors into a Luminal A majority (82%)
cluster, Basal-like/ErbB2+ majority (86%) cluster and a non-specific cluster with
samples that were also inconclusive in their expression-based subtype
correlations. Contributing methylation loci were both gene associated loci (30%) 
and non-gene associated (70%), suggesting subtype dependant genome-wide
alterations in the methylation landscape. The methylation patterns of significant
differentially methylated genes in luminal A tumors are similar to those
identified in CD24 + luminal epithelial cells and the patterns in basal-like
tumors similar to CD44 + breast progenitor cells. CpG islands in the HOXA cluster
and other homeobox (IRX2, DLX2, NKX2-2) genes were significantly more methylated 
in Luminal A tumors. A significant number of genes (2853, p < 0.05) exhibited
expression-methylation correlation, implying possible functional effects of
methylation on gene expression. Furthermore, analysis of these tumors by using
follow-up survival data identified differential methylation of islands proximal
to genes involved in Cell Cycle and Proliferation (Ki-67, UBE2C, KIF2C, HDAC4),
angiogenesis (VEGF, BTG1, KLF5), cell fate commitment (SPRY1, OLIG2, LHX2 and
LHX5) as having prognostic value independent of subtypes and other clinical
factors.

Copyright © 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21169070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. BMC Dev Biol. 2010 Nov 29;10:118. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-118.

Balanced Shh signaling is required for proper formation and maintenance of dorsal
telencephalic midline structures.

Himmelstein DS(1), Bi C, Clark BS, Bai B, Kohtz JD.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology and Department of Pediatrics, Children's Memorial
Research Center and Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University,
Chicago, IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: The rostral telencephalic dorsal midline is an organizing center
critical for the formation of the future cortex and hippocampus. While the
intersection of WNTs, BMPs, and FGFs establishes boundaries within this critical 
center, a direct role of Shh signaling in this region remains controversial. In
this paper we show that both increased and decreased Shh signaling directly
affects boundary formation within the telencephalic dorsal midline.
RESULTS: Viral over-expression of Shh in the embryonic telencephalon prevents
formation of the cortical hem and choroid plexus, while expanding the roof plate.
In a transgenic model where cholesterol-lacking ShhN is expressed from one allele
(ShhN/+), genes expressed in all three domains, cortical hem, choroid plexus and 
roof plate expand. In Gli1/2 -/- mutant brains, where Shh signaling is reduced,
the roof plate expands, again at the expense of cortical hem and plexus. Cell
autonomous activation of Shh signaling in the dorsal midline through Gdf7-driven 
activated Smoothened expression results in expansion of the Wnt3a-expressing
cortical hem into the plexus domain. In addition, developmental stage determines 
dorsal midline responsiveness to Shh.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these data demonstrate that balanced Shh signaling is
critical for maintaining regional boundaries within the dorsal midline
telencephalic organizing center.

PMCID: PMC3018372
PMID: 21114856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Neurosci. 2010 Aug 4;30(31):10551-62. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5563-09.2010.

LIM-homeobox gene Lhx5 is required for normal development of Cajal-Retzius cells.

Miquelajáuregui A(1), Varela-Echavarría A, Ceci ML, García-Moreno F, Ricaño I,
Hoang K, Frade-Pérez D, Portera-Cailliau C, Tamariz E, De Carlos JA, Westphal H, 
Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,
Querétaro, Querétaro 76230, Mexico.

Cajal-Retzius (C-R) cells play important roles in the lamination of the mammalian
cortex via reelin secretion. The genetic mechanisms underlying the development of
these neurons have just begun to be unraveled. Here, we show that two closely
related LIM-homeobox genes Lhx1 and Lhx5 are expressed in reelin+ cells in
various regions in the mouse telencephalon at or adjacent to sites where the C-R 
cells are generated, including the cortical hem, the mantle region of the
septal/retrobulbar area, and the ventral pallium. Whereas Lhx5 is expressed in
all of these reelin-expressing domains, Lhx1 is preferentially expressed in the
septal area and in a continuous domain spanning from lateral olfactory region to 
caudomedial territories. Genetic ablation of Lhx5 results in decreased reelin+
and p73+ cells in the neocortical anlage, in the cortical hem, and in the septal,
olfactory, and caudomedial telencephalic regions. The overall reduction in number
of C-R cells in Lhx5 mutants is accompanied by formation of ectopic reelin+ cell 
clusters at the caudal telencephalon. Based on differential expression of
molecular markers and by fluorescent cell tracing in cultured embryos, we located
the origin of reelin+ ectopic cell clusters at the caudomedial telencephalic
region. We also confirmed the existence of a normal migration stream of reelin+
cells from the caudomedial area to telencephalic olfactory territories in
wild-type embryos. These results reveal a complex role for Lhx5 in regulating the
development and normal distribution of C-R cells in the developing forebrain.

PMCID: PMC2927820
PMID: 20685998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Comp Neurol. 2010 Sep 1;518(17):3512-28. doi: 10.1002/cne.22410.

Similarities and differences in the forebrain expression of Lhx1 and Lhx5 between
chicken and mouse: Insights for understanding telencephalic development and
evolution.

Abellán A(1), Vernier B, Rétaux S, Medina L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Brain Development and Evolution, Department of Experimental
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lleida, Institut of Biomedical
Research of Lleida (IRBLLEIDA), 25008 Lleida Spain.

We compared expression of the paralogous LIM-homeodomain genes Lhx1 and Lhx5 in
the developing rostral forebrain of mouse and chicken. Both genes are expressed
in similar patterns in the septum, preoptic region, and related areas of the
basal telencephalon, including the medial septum/diagonal band nuclei and the
medial extended amygdala. In the septum, the expression of Lhx5 and Lhx1 appears 
to be specifically related to the pallial septum and its derivatives in mouse and
chicken, and may produce the glutamatergic neurons observed in the diagonal
band/medial septum nuclei. The preoptic area expresses both Lhx1 and Lhx5 in
mouse and chicken, and appears to produce gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic,
glutamatergic, and cholinergic cells for the preoptic region and basal
telencephalon. In addition, in mouse and chicken Lhx5 is expressed in two
extratelencephalic domains that appear to contribute Lhx5-expressing cells to the
basal telencephalon, including the supraoptoparaventricular hypothalamic domain
and the eminentia thalami. In contrast, there are striking differences in the
pallial expression of Lhx1 and Lhx5 between mouse and chicken. Both genes are
expressed in Cajal-Retzius cells, and Lhx5 is also present in most pallial
sources of Cajal-Retzius cells (including the cortical hem and retrobulbar area) 
and in the olfactory bulbs in the mouse. In contrast, putative Cajal-Retzius
cells, the retrobulbar area, and the olfactory bulb of chicken do not express the
paralog genes cLhx1/cLhx5. Moreover, the cortical hem-although it expresses
cLhx5-is very tiny in chicken. We discuss the consequences of these differences
in Lhx1/Lhx5 expression between mouse and chicken for pallial/cortical evolution.

PMID: 20589911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Biomed Sci. 2010 Jan 11;17:2. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-17-2.

Genetic copy number variants in sib pairs both affected with schizophrenia.

Lee CH(1), Liu CM, Wen CC, Chang SM, Hwu HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, National Taiwan University Hospital and National
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia is a complex disorder with involvement of multiple
genes.
METHODS: In this study, genome-wide screening for DNA copy-number variations
(CNVs) was conducted for ten pairs, a total of 20 cases, of affected siblings
using oligonucleotide array-based CGH.
RESULTS: We found negative symptoms were significantly more severe (p < 0.05) in 
the subgroup that harbored more genetic imbalance (n >== 13, n = number of
CNV-disrupted genes) as compared with the subgroup with fewer CNVs (n <== 6),
indicating that the degree of genetic imbalance may influence the severity of the
negative symptoms of schizophrenia. Four central nervous system (CNS) related
genes including CCAAT/enhancer binding protein, delta (CEBPD, 8q11.21), retinoid 
x receptor, alpha (RXRA, 9q34.2), LIM homeobox protein 5 (LHX5, 12q24.13) and
serine/threonine kinase 11 (STK11, 19p13.3) are recurrently (incidence >== 16.7%)
disrupted by CNVs. Two genes, PVR (poliovirus receptor) and BU678720, are
concordantly deleted in one and two, respectively, pairs of co-affected siblings.
However, we did not find a significant association of this BU678720 deletion and 
schizophrenia in a large case-control sample.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the high genetic loading of CNVs may be the
underlying cause of negative symptoms of schizophrenia, and the CNS-related genes
revealed by this study warrant further investigation.

PMCID: PMC2843606
PMID: 20064257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cereb Cortex. 2010 Aug;20(8):1788-98. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp242. Epub 2009 Nov
18.

Differential expression of LIM-homeodomain factors in Cajal-Retzius cells of
primates, rodents, and birds.

Abellan A(1), Menuet A, Dehay C, Medina L, Rétaux S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Brain Development and Evolution, Department of Experimental
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lleida, Institute of Biomedical
Research of Lleida, 25008 Lleida, Spain.

Reelin-expressing Cajal-Retzius (CR) cells are among the earliest generated cells
in the mammalian cerebral cortex and are believed to be crucial for both the
development and the evolution of a laminated pattern in the pallial wall of the
telencephalon. LIM-homeodomain (LIM-hd) transcription factors are expressed
during brain development in a highly restricted and combinatorial manner, and
they specify regional and cellular identity. We have investigated the expression 
of the LIM-hd members Lhx1/Lhx2/Lhx5/Lhx6/Lhx9 in the reelin-expressing cells,
the pallium, and the regions of origin of CR cells including the cortical hem of 
3 amniote species: the mouse, the chick, and the macaque monkey. We found major
differences in the combinatorial LIM-hd expression in the marginal zone as well
as in the hem. 1) Lhx5 is a "preferential LIM-hd" for CR cells in mammals but not
expressed by these cells in chicks. 2) Lhx2 is expressed in the hem of the chick,
whereas it is excluded from this region in mouse. 3) Whereas mouse CR cells
express Lhx5/Lhx1, their monkey counterparts express 4 of these factors:
Lhx1/Lhx2/Lhx5/Lhx9. We discuss our findings in evolutionary terms for the
specification of the midline hem and CR cell type and the emergence of the
cortical lamination pattern.

PMID: 19923199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Dev Dyn. 2009 Jan;238(1):150-61. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21818.

RNA profiling of FAC-sorted neurons from the developing zebrafish spinal cord.

Cerda GA(1), Hargrave M, Lewis KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

In this report, we describe a successful protocol for isolating and
expression-profiling live fluorescent-protein-labelled neurons from zebrafish
embryos. As a proof-of-principle for this method, we FAC-sorted and RNA-profiled 
GFP-labelled spinal CiA interneurons and compared the expression profile of these
cells to those of post-mitotic spinal neurons in general and to all trunk cells. 
We show that RNA of sufficient quality and quantity to uncover both expected and 
novel transcription profiles via Affymetrix microarray analysis can be extracted 
from 5,700 to 20,000 FAC-sorted cells. As part of this study, we also further
confirm the genetic homology of mammalian and zebrafish V1 interneurons, by
demonstrating that zebrafish V1 cells (CiAs) express genes that encode for the
transcription factors Lhx1a and Lhx5. This protocol for dissociating, sorting and
RNA-profiling neurons from organogenesis-stage zebrafish embryos should also be
applicable to other developing organs and tissues and potentially other model
organisms.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19097188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Dev Biol. 2008 Oct 15;322(2):381-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.08.002. Epub 2008 
Aug 7.

A transcriptional network coordinately determines transmitter and peptidergic
fate in the dorsal spinal cord.

Bröhl D(1), Strehle M, Wende H, Hori K, Bormuth I, Nave KA, Müller T, Birchmeier 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Max-Delbrück-Centrum for Molecular Medicine,
Berlin, Germany.

Dorsal horn neurons express many different neuropeptides that modulate sensory
perception like the sensation of pain. Inhibitory neurons of the dorsal horn
derive from postmitotic neurons that express Pax2, Lbx1 and Lhx1/5, and diversify
during maturation. In particular, fractions of maturing inhibitory neurons
express various neuropeptides. We demonstrate here that a coordinate molecular
mechanism determines inhibitory and peptidergic fate in the developing dorsal
horn. A bHLH factor complex that contains Ptf1a acts as upstream regulator and
initiates the expression of several downstream transcription factors in the
future inhibitory neurons, of which Pax2 is known to determine the
neurotransmitter phenotype. We demonstrate here that dynorphin, galanin, NPY,
nociceptin and enkephalin expression depends on Ptf1a, indicating that these
neuropeptides are expressed in inhibitory neurons. Furthermore, we show that
Neurod1/2/6 and Lhx1/5, which act downstream of Ptf1a, control distinct aspects
of peptidergic differentiation. In particular, the Neurod1/2/6 factors are
essential for dynorphin and galanin expression, whereas the Lhx1/5 factors are
essential for NPY expression. We conclude that a transcriptional network operates
in maturing dorsal horn neurons that coordinately determines transmitter and
peptidergic fate.

PMID: 18721803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Dev Biol. 2008 Aug 1;320(1):92-101. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.04.034. Epub 2008
May 8.

FGF8 signaling patterns the telencephalic midline by regulating putative key
factors of midline development.

Okada T(1), Okumura Y, Motoyama J, Ogawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cell Culture Development, Brain Science Institute, RIKEN, 2-1
Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama, 351-0198, Japan. toshiokada@brain.riken.jp

FGF8 has been reported to act as a primary regulator of neocortical patterning
along the anteroposterior (AP) axis in the mouse telencephalon, and disruption of
FGF signaling causes distortion of molecular arealization along the AP axis.
Since hypoplasia of midline structures is observed in Fgf8 mutant mice, FGF8 is
also postulated to be involved in telencephalic midline development. In this
study we analyzed the role of FGF8 in midline development by means of
gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments. The results showed that FGF8
up-regulates the expression of transcription factor (TF) genes, including
putative key factors involved in midline development. Although FGF8 had been
thought to act downstream of SHH signaling, ectopic FGF8 up-regulates the
expression of midline TF genes in Shh null mice, suggesting that FGF signaling
acts as an upstream positive regulator of midline TFs during midline development 
independently of SHH.

PMID: 18547559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Brain Res Bull. 2008 Mar 18;75(2-4):241-5. doi:
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2007.10.027. Epub 2007 Nov 20.

Anuran olfactory bulb organization: embryology, neurochemistry and hodology.

Moreno N(1), Morona R, López JM, Dominguez L, Muñoz M, González A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University Autonoma of Madrid,
Spain.

In Xenopus laevis, we analyzed the origin of the projection neurons and
interneurons in the developing olfactory bulbs by studying the expression
patterns of the genes x-Eomes, x-Lhx5, x-Dll3 and x-Pax6. Olfactory bulb
interneurons were characterized by using four conserved molecular markers for
distinct subpopulations: gamma-aminobutyric acid, calretinin, calbindin, and
tyrosine hydroxylase. Immunohistochemistry was combined with tract-tracing
experiments to demonstrate the projection neurons and the interneurons of the
olfactory bulbs simultaneously. Taken together, the results showed: (1) the
pallial nature of the olfactory bulb and its projection neurons in Xenopus, like 
in mammals with comparable central projection areas, (2) the subpallial origin of
the interneurons that, most likely, follow migratory pathways comparable to those
described for mammals, (3) the different interneuron types possess neurochemical 
characteristics similar to mammals. Therefore, the present results show that the 
origin, chemoarchitecture and central connections of the olfactory bulbs are
highly conserved in evolution.

PMID: 18331878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Dev Neurobiol. 2008 Mar;68(4):504-20. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20603.

Evidences for tangential migrations in Xenopus telencephalon: developmental
patterns and cell tracking experiments.

Moreno N(1), González A, Rétaux S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Biology, University Complutense of
Madrid, Spain. nerea@bio.ucm.es

Extensive tangential cell migrations have been described in the developing
mammalian, avian, and reptilian forebrain, and they are viewed as a powerful
developmental mechanism to increase neuronal complexity in a given brain
structure. Here, we report for the first time anatomical and cell tracking
evidence for the presence of important migratory processes in the developing
forebrain of the anamniote Xenopus laevis. Combining developmental gene
expression patterns (Pax6, Nkx2.1, Isl1, Lhx5, Lhx9, and Dll3), neurotransmitter 
identity (GABA, NOS, ChAT), and connectivity information, several types of
putative migratory cell populations and migration routes originating in the
ventral pallium and the subpallium are proposed. By means of in vivo cell
tracking experiments, pallio-subpallial and subpallio-pallial migrating neurons
are visualized. Among them, populations of Nkx2.1(+) striatal interneurons and
pallial GABAergic interneurons, which also express the migratory marker
doublecortin, are identified. Finally, we find that these tangentially migrating 
pallial interneurons travel through an "isl1-free channel" that may guide their
course through the subpallium. Our findings strongly suggest that the developing 
Xenopus telencephalon shares many similarities with amniotes in terms of neuronal
specification and migrations. However, some differences are discussed,
particularly with regard to the evolution of the pallium.

PMID: 18214835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Aug 7;104(32):13182-6. Epub 2007 Jul 30.

LIM-homeodomain proteins Lhx1 and Lhx5, and their cofactor Ldb1, control Purkinje
cell differentiation in the developing cerebellum.

Zhao Y(1), Kwan KM, Mailloux CM, Lee WK, Grinberg A, Wurst W, Behringer RR,
Westphal H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892-2790, USA.

Purkinje cells are one of the major types of neurons that form the neural
circuitry in the cerebellum essential for fine control of movement and posture.
During development, Purkinje cells also are critically involved in the regulation
of proliferation of progenitors of granule cells, the other major type of neurons
in the cerebellum. The process that controls differentiation of Purkinje cells
from their early precursors is poorly understood. Here we report that two closely
related LIM-homeobox genes, Lhx1 and Lhx5, were expressed in the developing
Purkinje cells soon after they exited the cell cycle and migrated out of the
cerebellar ventricular zone. Double-mutant mice lacking function of both Lhx1 and
Lhx5 showed a severe reduction in the number of Purkinje cells. In addition,
targeted inactivation of Ldb1, which encodes a cofactor for all LIM-homeodomain
proteins, resulted in a similar phenotype. Our studies thus provide evidence that
these transcription regulators are essential for controlling Purkinje cell
differentiation in the developing mammalian cerebellum.

PMCID: PMC1941824
PMID: 17664423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Comp Neurol. 2007 Aug 20;503(6):815-31.

Development of the vomeronasal amygdala in anuran amphibians: hodological,
neurochemical, and gene expression characterization.

Moreno N(1), González A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular, Facultad de Biología, Universidad
Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

The organization of the amygdaloid complex in amphibians possesses major features
shared with amniotes. Basic subdivisions have been identified and tentatively
compared with their counterparts in other tetrapods. However, problems appeared
when trying to find homologies for the amphibian vomeronasal amygdala, the medial
amygdala (MeA), because of its embryological origin and, therefore, its
evolutionary significance could not be established. Thus, in the present study
the main characteristics of the MeA in anurans were studied during development by
means of tract-tracing, immunohistochemical, and gene expression techniques. The 
connectivity of the MeA, mainly related to the accessory olfactory bulb and the
hypothalamus, and the localization of neurochemical markers such as substance P, 
somatostatin, and GABA strongly support its homology with the medial amygdala
(subpallial) of mammals. In addition, analysis of the expression patterns of the 
LIM-homeodomain genes x-Lhx5/7/9 in the developing MeA, together with the
immunohistochemistry for GABA and the transcription factor NKX2.1, evidence its
resemblance to the subpallial component of the vomeronasal amygdala of mammals in
terms of embryological origin and, most likely, the presence of migrated cells
from other territories. No evidence was found for pallial-derived territories in 
the vomeronasal amygdala of anurans that could be comparable to the cortical
portions that exist in amniotes, suggesting that these cortical components have
emerged in the anamnio-amniotic transition in the evolution of tetrapods.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17570503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Development. 2007 Jan;134(2):357-66. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

Lhx1 and Lhx5 maintain the inhibitory-neurotransmitter status of interneurons in 
the dorsal spinal cord.

Pillai A(1), Mansouri A, Behringer R, Westphal H, Goulding M.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Graduate Program, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

Lhx1 and Lhx5 are co-expressed in multiple interneuron cell types in the
developing spinal cord. These include early-born dI4 and dI6 inhibitory
interneurons, as well as late-born inhibitory dILA neurons (dILA), all of which
express the paired-domain transcription factor Pax2. Although it appears that
Lhx1 and Lhx5 do not control the initial specification of the neuronal cell types
in which they are expressed, we have found a cell-autonomous requirement for
either Lhx1 or Lhx5 to maintain the expression of Pax2, Pax5 and Pax8 in dorsal
inhibitory neurons at later developmental stages. Lhx1; Lhx5 double-knockout mice
exhibit a downregulation of Gad1 and Viaat (Slc32a1) from E13.5 onwards that is
closely associated with a decrease in Pax2 expression. Pax2 is a key factor for
dorsal GABAergic identity, with the expression of Pax5 and Pax8 being
differentially dependent on Pax2 in the dorsal horn. In summary, our findings
support a model in which the differentiation of GABAergic interneurons in the
dorsal cord depends on Pax2, with Lhx1 and Lhx5 helping to activate and maintain 
Pax2 expression in these cells. Lhx1 and Lhx5 therefore function together with
Pax2, Pax5 and Pax8 to establish a GABAergic inhibitory-neurotransmitter program 
in dorsal horn interneurons.

PMID: 17166926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Development. 2006 Aug;133(16):3191-200. Epub 2006 Jul 19.

Lhx5 promotes forebrain development and activates transcription of secreted Wnt
antagonists.

Peng G(1), Westerfield M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-1254, USA.

In vertebrate embryos, induction and patterning of the forebrain require the
local inhibition of caudalizing signals, such as Wnts, emanating from the
mesendoderm and caudal brain. Here, we report that Lhx5, expressed in the rostral
neuroectoderm, regulates the local inhibition of Wnts. Activation of Lhx5 expands
forebrain structures, whereas inhibition of Lhx5 function compromises forebrain
development in zebrafish embryos. Lhx5 can rescue forebrain deficiencies caused
by excess Wnt activity, and inhibition of Lhx5 function results in ectopic
activation of Wnt signaling. Lhx5 regulates the expression of two secreted
Frizzled-related Wnt antagonists, Sfrp1a and Sfrp5. These Sfrps can reduce the
ectopic activation of Wnt signaling and rescue the forebrain deficiencies caused 
by inhibition of Lhx5 function. Our results demonstrate that Lhx5 is a required
factor that promotes forebrain development and inhibits Wnt signaling by
activating the transcription of secreted Wnt antagonists.

PMID: 16854974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Sep;20(9):2093-108. Epub 2006 Apr 13.

The LIM-homeodomain proteins Isl-1 and Lhx3 act with steroidogenic factor 1 to
enhance gonadotrope-specific activity of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone
receptor gene promoter.

Granger A(1), Bleux C, Kottler ML, Rhodes SJ, Counis R, Laverrière JN.

Author information: 
(1)Physiologie de l'Axe Gonadotrope, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7079, Physiologie et Physiopathologie,
Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris6, 4 place Jussieu, 75252 Paris cedex 05,
France.

The GnRH receptor (GnRH-R) plays a central role in mammalian reproductive
function throughout adulthood. It also appears as an early marker gene of the
presumptive gonadotrope lineage in developing pituitary. Here, using transient
transfections combined with DNA/protein interaction assays, we have delineated
cis-acting elements within the rat GnRH-R gene promoter that represent targets
for the LIM-homeodomain (LIM-HD) proteins, Isl-1 and Lhx3. These factors,
critical in early pituitary development, are thus also crucial for
gonadotrope-specific expression of the GnRH-R gene. In heterologous cells, the
expression of Isl-1 and Lhx3, together with steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1),
culminates in the activation of both the rat as well as human GnRH-R promoter,
suggesting that this combination is evolutionarily conserved among mammals. The
specificity of these LIM-HD factors is attested by the inefficiency of related
proteins, including Lhx5 and Lhx9, to activate the GnRH-R gene promoter, as well 
as by the repressive capacity of a dominant-negative derivative of Lhx3.
Accordingly, targeted deletion of the LIM response element decreases promoter
activity. In addition, experiments with Gal4-SF-1 fusion proteins suggest that
LIM-HD protein activity in gonadotrope cells is dependent upon SF-1 binding.
Finally, using a transgenic model that allows monitoring of in vivo promoter
activity, we show that the overlapping expression of Isl-1 and Lhx3 in the
developing pituitary correlates with promoter activity. Collectively, these data 
suggest the occurrence of a specific LIM-HD pituitary code and designate the
GnRH-R gene as the first identified transcriptional target of Isl-1 in the
anterior pituitary.

PMID: 16613990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Dev Biol. 2005 Dec 1;288(1):100-12. Epub 2005 Nov 10.

Organisation of the lamprey (Lampetra fluviatilis) embryonic brain: insights from
LIM-homeodomain, Pax and hedgehog genes.

Osorio J(1), Mazan S, Rétaux S.

Author information: 
(1)UPR2197 Développement, Evolution, Plasticité du Système Nerveux, Institut de
Neurobiologie Alfred FESSARD, C.N.R.S., Avenue de la Terrasse, 91198
Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.

To investigate the embryonic development of the central nervous system of the
lamprey Lampetra fluviatilis, we have isolated and analysed the expression
patterns of members of the LIM-homeodomain, Pax, Hedgehog and Nkx2.1 families.
Using degenerate RT-PCR, single representatives of Lhx1/Lhx5, Lhx2/Lhx9,
Pax3/Pax7 and Hedgehog families could be isolated in L. fluviatilis. Expression
analysis revealed that the lamprey forebrain presents a clear neuromeric pattern.
We describe the existence of 4 embryonic diencephalic prosomeres whose boundaries
can be identified by the combined and relative expressions of LfPax37, LfLhx15
and LfLhx29. This suggests that the embryonic lamprey and gnathostome forebrain
are patterned in a highly similar manner. Moreover, analysis of the LfHh gene,
which is expressed in the hypothalamus, zona limitans intrathalamica and floor
plate, reveals the possible molecular origin of this neuromeric brain pattern. By
contrast, LfHh and LfNkx2.1 expressions suggest major differences in patterning
mechanisms of the ventral telencephalon when compared to gnathostomes. In
summary, our findings highlight a neuromeric organisation of the embryonic
agnathan forebrain and point to the possible origin of this organisation, which
is thus a truly vertebrate character. They also suggest that Hh/Shh midline
signalling might act as a driving force for forebrain evolution.

PMID: 16289025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Biol Psychiatry. 2006 Mar 1;59(5):434-9. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

A polymorphism in the PDLIM5 gene associated with gene expression and
schizophrenia.

Horiuchi Y(1), Arai M, Niizato K, Iritani S, Noguchi E, Ohtsuki T, Koga M, Kato
T, Itokawa M, Arinami T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Results of recent DNA microarray analyses of postmortem brains of
patients with schizophrenia revealed that expression of the PDZ and LIM domain 5 
gene (PDLIM5) is increased. In the present study, we examined whether
polymorphisms in PDLIM5 are associated with schizophrenia.
METHODS: We screened for mutations in PDLIM5 in 24 Japanese patients with
schizophrenia and evaluated the associations of the identified polymorphisms with
schizophrenia in a Japanese case-control population (total samples, 278
schizophrenia patients and 462 control subjects). Expression of PDLIM5 was
quantified by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in
postmortem prefrontal cortex of 34 schizophrenia patients. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) was performed to examine whether a polymorphism
influences nuclear protein binding.
RESULTS: We identified 27 polymorphisms in PDLIM5 and found associations between 
polymorphisms (rs2433320 and rs2433322) in the 5' region of the gene and
schizophrenia (p = .004). Real-time quantitative PCR revealed that these
polymorphisms influenced gene expression (p = .007). An EMSA showed that the
different alleles of the rs2433320 polymorphism bound differently to nuclear
proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that PDLIM5 might play a role in genetic
susceptibility to schizophrenia.

PMID: 16213469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Neuron. 2005 May 19;46(4):647-60.

Lhx6 delineates a pathway mediating innate reproductive behaviors from the
amygdala to the hypothalamus.

Choi GB(1), Dong HW, Murphy AJ, Valenzuela DM, Yancopoulos GD, Swanson LW,
Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 216-76, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
California 91125, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2005 May 19;46(4):525-6.

In mammals, innate reproductive and defensive behaviors are mediated by
anatomically segregated connections between the amygdala and hypothalamus. This
anatomic segregation poses the problem of how the brain integrates activity in
these circuits when faced with conflicting stimuli eliciting such mutually
exclusive behaviors. Using genetically encoded and conventional axonal tracers,
we have found that the transcription factor Lhx6 delineates the reproductive
branch of this pathway. Other Lhx proteins mark neurons in amygdalar nuclei
implicated in defense. We have traced parallel projections from the posterior
medial amygdala, activated by reproductive or defensive olfactory stimuli,
respectively, to a point of convergence in the ventromedial hypothalamus. The
opposite neurotransmitter phenotypes of these convergent projections suggest a
"gate control" mechanism for the inhibition of reproductive behaviors by
threatening stimuli. Our data therefore identify a potential neural substrate for
integrating the influences of conflicting behavioral cues and a transcription
factor family that may contribute to the development of this substrate.

PMID: 15944132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Comp Neurol. 2005 May 9;485(3):240-54.

LIM-homeodomain genes as territory markers in the brainstem of adult and
developing Xenopus laevis.

Moreno N(1), Bachy I, Rétaux S, González A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular, Facultad de Biología, Universidad
Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

We investigated expression patterns of the LIM-homeodomain (LIM-hd) genes x-Lhx1,
x-Lhx2, x-Lhx5, and x-Lhx9 in the brainstem of Xenopus laevis during larval
development and in the adult. The two groups of paralogous genes, x-Lhx1/x-Lhx5
and x-Lhx2/x-Lhx9, showed fundamentally different expression patterns, being
expressed in ventral versus dorsal territories of the midbrain and hindbrain,
respectively. Indeed, prominent expression of x-Lhx1/5 was found in the
mesencephalic tegmentum and the hindbrain reticular formation, whereas
conspicuous x-Lhx2/9 expression was observed in the torus semicircularis and
isthmic nucleus. A few shared expression domains for the two pairs of paralogs
included the optic tectum and the anterodorsal and pedunculopontine nuclei. In
each structure, expression of the two paralogs was almost identical, indicating
that the regulation of their expression in this part of the brain has evolved
slightly since gene duplication occurred. Notable exceptions included the
expression of x-Lhx1 but not x-Lhx5 in the Purkinje cells and the expression of
x-Lhx9 but not x-Lhx2 in the lateral line nucleus. The analysis of LIM-hd
expression patterns throughout development allowed the origin of given structures
in early embryos to be traced back. x-Lhx1 and x-Lhx5 were relevant to locate the
cerebellar anlage and to follow morphogenesis of the cerebellar plate and
cerebellar nuclei. They also highlighted the rhombomeric organization of the
hindbrain. On the other hand, x-Lhx2 and x-Lhx9 showed a dynamic spatiotemporal
pattern relative to tectal development and layering, and x-Lhx9 was useful to
trace back the origin of the isthmus in early development.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15791640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Jan;28(1):30-41.

Homeodomain transcription factors in the development of subsets of hindbrain
reticulospinal neurons.

Cepeda-Nieto AC(1), Pfaff SL, Varela-Echavarría A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Querétaro
76230, México.

Hindbrain reticulospinal neurons are involved in complex neural functions that
are mediated by spinal elements, including posture control and modulation of
respiration and cardiovascular function. Recent descriptive studies with chick,
mouse, and rat embryos have provided anatomical insight into the development of
the different reticulospinal nuclei and the establishment of their axonal
projection pathways into the spinal cord. In this study, we have addressed the
molecular control of this process. Retrograde labeling of reticulospinal neurons 
in chick and mouse embryos combined with immunostaining for the homeodomain
factors Lhx1/Lhx5, Lhx3/Lhx4, and Chx10 have defined transcriptional codes that
label subsets of neurons with different axon projection patterns. Gain of
function and loss of function experiments using in ovo electroporation implicate 
these transcription factors in the determination of reticulospinal neuron
identity. Furthermore, our studies reveal novel gene interactions between the
transcription factors analyzed that may determine the final patterns of
reticulospinal axon projection.

PMID: 15607939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Comp Neurol. 2004 Apr 19;472(1):52-72.

LIM-homeodomain genes as developmental and adult genetic markers of Xenopus
forebrain functional subdivisions.

Moreno N(1), Bachy I, Rétaux S, González A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular, Facultad de Biología, Universidad
Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

We have investigated the expression patterns of five LIM-homeodomain (LIM-hd)
genes, x-Lhx1, x-Lhx2, x-Lhx5, x-Lhx7, and x-Lhx9 in the forebrain of the frog
Xenopus laevis during larval development and in the adult. The results were
analyzed in terms of neuromeric organization of the amphibian brain and of
combinatorial LIM-hd code and showed that LIM-hd developmental transcription
factors are particularly powerful to highlight the coherence of several groups or
nuclei, to delineate subdivisions, and/or to clarify structures that are still a 
matter of debate. Among other findings, we bring substantial evidence for the
following: (1) a dual origin of olfactory bulb neurons, based on x-Lhx5
expression; (2) the existence of a ventral pallium in frog, based on x-Lhx9
expression; (3) a multiple (pallial and subpallial) origin for the nuclei of the 
amygdaloid complex, based on distinct combinations of the five studied genes; (4)
a clear homology between the Xenopus medial pallium and the mammalian
hippocampus, based on x-Lhx2 pattern; and (5) a confirmed prosomeric organization
of the diencephalon, based on alternating x-Lhx1/5 and x-Lhx2/9 expressions. In
addition, the important expression levels for LIM-hd factors found throughout
development and in the adult brain suggest a role for these genes in development 
and maintenance of neuronal specification and phenotype, as for example in the
case of x-Lhx7 and cholinergic neurons. Moreover, following LIM-hd patterns
throughout development points out to some of the migrations and morphogenetic
movements, which give rise to the adult structures. Finally, the detailed
description of the LIM-hd code in the developing and adult Xenopus forebrain
provides interesting cues for the possible mechanisms of evolution of the
vertebrate forebrain.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15024752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Neuroreport. 2003 Dec 19;14(18):2355-8.

Pallial origin of mitral cells in the olfactory bulbs of Xenopus.

Moreno N(1), Bachy I, Rétaux S, González A.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Biología Celular, Facultad de Biología, Universidad
Complutense, Madrid, Spain.

We used two developmental transcription factors, x-Eomes (T-box family) and
x-Lhx5 (LIM-homeodomain family), to follow the origin and development of the
olfactory bulbs in Xenopus. During embryonic and larval development, x-Eomes and 
x-Lhx5 were expressed in highly similar patterns, in the lateral and
latero-ventral wall of the pallium. In adults, both markers were strongly and
specifically expressed in mitral cells, i.e., in the projection neurons of the
main and accessory olfactory bulbs. These results demonstrate the pallial origin 
of the olfactory projecting cells in Xenopus. Combined with previous results
suggesting a subpallial origin for olfactory interneurons, these findings
emphasize the dual origin of different neuronal populations in the bulbs of
anamniotes, and suggest that this organization is a shared feature of tetrapods.

PMID: 14663190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2003 May;23(1):107-20.

Dlx transcription factors regulate differentiation of dopaminergic neurons of the
ventral thalamus.

Andrews GL(1), Yun K, Rubenstein JL, Mastick GS.

Author information: 
(1)Biology and Biochemistry Departments, Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate
Program, University of Nevada, Reno 89557, USA.

Recent studies have provided many lines of evidence that specific homeodomain
factors act to regulate differentiation into specific neuron types. However,
these studies have mainly focused on the caudal CNS, while in the forebrain, the 
regulation of neuron specification remains relatively unknown. To investigate the
genetic regulatory networks that control neuron differentiation in the forebrain,
we have analyzed the expression patterns and functions of DLX homeodomain factors
in the ventral thalamus of early mouse embryos. During initial neurogenesis
(E9.5-E10.5), DLX(+) cells are the first progenitors to make terminal divisions
and differentiate as neurons. We have defined a set of regulatory genes
coexpressed with DLX, in both progenitors (PAX6 and MASH1) and in the
differentiating neurons (PAX6, along with a combination of LIM-type homeodomain
factors, including ISL1, Lhx1/Lim1, and Lhx5/Lim2). These initial neurons express
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), and become the PAX6-expressing A13 dopaminergic
neurons of the zona incerta. To test for DLX function, the initial
differentiation of the ventral thalamic neurons was examined in embryos mutant
for Dlx1 and Dlx2. Dlx1/2 double homozygous mutants formed ventral thalamic
neurons, but these neurons lacked PAX6, ISL1, and TH expression. These data
suggest that DLX genes act as forebrain-specific factors linking general
neuron-inducing signals to region-specific neuron differentiation programs.

PMID: 12799141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Psychiatr Genet. 2003 Jun;13(2):97-101.

Mutational analysis of two positional candidate susceptibility genes for bipolar 
disorder on chromosome 12q23-q24: phenylalanine hydroxylase and human
LIM-homeobox LHX5.

Green EK(1), Elvidge GP, Owen MJ, Craddock N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Psychiatry Group, Division of Neuroscience, University of
Birmingham, Queen Elizabeth Psychiatric Hospital, Birmingham, UK.

OBJECTIVES: In the search for chromosome 12 genes potentially involved in the
pathogenesis of bipolar disorder we will screen Phenylalanine hydroxylase and
human LIM-homeobox LHX5 genes for sequence variants, both of which have been
suggested as candidate genes. The genes lie on chromosome 12q23-24, near the
Darier's disease gene, ATP2A2. We have previously reported two families in which 
the pattern of segregation of illness is consistent with genetic linkage between 
this chromosomal region and a putative highly penetrant autosomal dominant major 
affective disorder locus (pedigree 324, maximum LOD=2.1; pedigree 5501, maximum
LOD=3.6).
METHODS: We screened the coding and intronic flanking regions of the
phenylalanine hydroxylase and LHX5 genes for sequence variation by denaturing
high-performance liquid chromatography in individuals from the pedigrees.
RESULTS: In total, nine single nucleotide polymorphisms and one 6 base pair
deletion were identified.
CONCLUSION: Our studies allowed us to conclude that none of these variants act as
a highly penetrant autosomal dominant susceptibility locus for mood disorder in
our families.

PMID: 12782966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Development. 2003 Jun;130(12):2695-704.

The Xenopus LIM-homeodomain protein Xlim5 regulates the differential adhesion
properties of early ectoderm cells.

Houston DW(1), Wylie C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology MLC 7007, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

One of the earliest lineage restriction events in embryogenesis is the
specification of the primary germ layers: ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm. In
Xenopus, germ layer specification occurs prior to gastrulation and requires the
transcription factor VegT both for the cell-autonomous specification of endoderm 
and the generation of mesoderm-inducing signals. In the absence of VegT, ectoderm
is formed in all regions of the embryo. In this work, we show that VegT-depleted 
vegetal cells (prospective endoderm) behave like animal cells in sorting assays
and ectopically express early markers of ectoderm. To gain insight into how
ectoderm is specified, we looked for candidate ectoderm-specific genes that are
ectopically expressed in VegT-depleted embryos, and examined the role of one of
these, the LIM homeobox gene Xlim5, in ectoderm development. We show that
overexpression of Xlim5 in prospective endoderm cells is sufficient to impair
sorting of animal cells from vegetal cells but is not sufficient (at similar
doses) to induce ectoderm-specific genes. In whole embryos, Xlim5 causes vegetal 
cells to segregate inappropriately to other germ layers and express late
differentiation markers of that germ layer. Inhibition of Xlim5 function using an
Engrailed repressor construct or a morpholino oligonucleotide causes loss of
animal cell adhesion or delay in neural fold morphogenesis, respectively, without
significantly affecting early ectoderm gene expression. Taken together, our
results provide evidence that a primary role for Xlim5 is to specifically
regulate differential cell adhesion behaviour of the ectoderm.

PMID: 12736213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mech Dev. 2002 Sep;117(1-2):163-72.

Defining pallial and subpallial divisions in the developing Xenopus forebrain.

Bachy I(1), Berthon J, Rétaux S.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2197 Développement, Evolution, Plasticité du Système Nerveux, Institut de 
Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard, CNRS, Avenue de la Terrasse, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette
cedex, France.

To shed light on the organisation of the Xenopus laevis telencephalon, we have
used two sets of developmental regulators: genes acting in early regional
specification (x-Dll3, x-Nkx2.1, x-Emx1, x-Pax6, x-Eomes) or in cell
determination (x-Lhx5 and x-Lhx7). After expression patterns analysis, separately
or combined, on whole-mount brains and serial sections, we identify the Xenopus
pallium and subpallium, and the subdivisions herein. The data show a conservation
of the same basic Bauplan for Xenopus forebrain patterning compared to other
vertebrates, and suggest the possibility for LIM-homeodomain genes to be
candidate downstream target of the regionalization genes. Comparing the relative 
sizes of the deduced subdivisions, Xenopus seems to have an intermediate
phylogenetic position in terms of pallium contribution to the telencephalon, and 
ventral pallium contribution to the pallium.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12204256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Neurosci. 2001 Oct 1;21(19):7620-9.

The LIM-homeodomain gene family in the developing Xenopus brain: conservation and
divergences with the mouse related to the evolution of the forebrain.

Bachy I(1), Vernier P, Retaux S.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2197 "Développement, Evolution, Plasticité du Système Nerveux," Institut
de Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.

A comparative analysis of LIM-homeodomain (LIM-hd) expression patterns in the
developing stage 32 Xenopus brain is presented. x-Lhx2, x-Lhx7, and x-Lhx9 were
isolated and their expression, together with that of x-Lhx1 and x-Lhx5, was
analyzed in terms of prosomeric brain development and LIM-hd combinatorial code
and compared with mouse expression data. The results show an almost complete
conservation of expression patterns in the diencephalon. The Lhx1/5 and Lhx2/9
subgroups label the pretectum/ventral thalamus/zona limitans versus the dorsal
thalamus, respectively, in alternating stripes of expression in both species.
Conversely, strong divergences in expression patterns are observed between the
telencephalon of the two species for Lhx1/5 and Lhx2/9. Lhx7 exhibits
particularly conservative patterns and is proposed as a medial ganglionic
eminence marker. The conservation of diencephalic segments is proposed to mirror 
the conservative nature of diencephalic structures across vertebrates. In
contrast, the telencephalic divergences are proposed to reflect the emergence of 
significant novelty in the telencephalon (connectivity changes) at the
anamniote/amniote transition. Moreover, the data allow the new delineation of
pallial and subpallial domains in the developing frog telencephalon, which are
compared with mouse subdivisions. In the pallium, the mouse combinatorial
expression of LIM-hd is notably richer than in the frog, again possibly
reflecting evolutionary changes in cortical connectivity.

PMID: 11567052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Physiol Behav. 2001 Aug;73(5):781-92.

Learning impairments and motor dysfunctions in adult Lhx5-deficient mice
displaying hippocampal disorganization.

Paylor R(1), Zhao Y, Libbey M, Westphal H, Crawley JN.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Behavioral Neuropharmacology, Experimental Therapeutics Branch,
National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Building 10, 
Room 4D11, Bethesda, MD 20892-1375, USA.

Lhx5 is a member of the LIM homeobox gene family that regulates development of
the nervous system. Adult mice generated with a mutation in Lhx5 were found to
display absent or disorganized hippocampal neuroanatomy. The pyramidal cell layer
in Ammon's horn and the granule cell layer in the dentate gyrus were absent or
poorly defined in the hippocampus of adult Lhx5 knockout mice. Behavioral
phenotyping of Lhx5 null mutants detected deficits on learning and memory tasks, 
including the Barnes maze spatial learning task, spontaneous alternation
recognition memory, and contextual and cued fear conditioning. General health,
neurological reflexes, and sensory abilities appeared to be normal in Lhx5
knockout mice. Motor tests showed impaired performance on some measures of motor 
activity, coordination, balance, and gait. These results reveal functional
outcomes of Lhx5 gene deletion on the integrity of hippocampal neuroanatomy and
behavior in the adult mouse.

PMID: 11566211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. EMBO Rep. 2001 Jun;2(6):536-40.

Angiostatin effects on endothelial cells mediated by ceramide and RhoA.

Gupta N(1), Nodzenski E, Khodarev NN, Yu J, Khorasani L, Beckett MA, Kufe DW,
Weichselbaum RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Chicago, MC 9006, 5758 South Maryland
Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Angiostatin is a cleavage product of plasminogen that has anti-angiogenic
properties. We investigated whether the effects of angiostatin on endothelial
cells are mediated by ceramide, a lipid implicated in endothelial cell signaling.
Our results demonstrate that angiostatin produces a transient increase in
ceramide that correlates with actin stress fiber reorganization, detachment and
death. DNA array expression analysis performed on ceramide-treated human
endothelial cells demonstrated induction of certain genes involved in
cytoskeleton organization. Specifically, we report that treatment with
angiostatin or ceramide results in the activation of RhoA, an important effector 
of cytoskeletal structure. We also show that treatment of endothelial cells with 
the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine abrogates morphological changes and cytotoxic
effects of treatment with angiostatin or ceramide. These findings support a model
in which angiostatin induces a transient rise in ceramide, RhoA activation and
free radical production.

PMCID: PMC1083909
PMID: 11415988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Neurosci. 2001 Apr 15;21(8):2711-25.

Combinatorial expression patterns of LIM-homeodomain and other regulatory genes
parcellate developing thalamus.

Nakagawa Y(1), O'Leary DD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

The anatomical and functional organization of dorsal thalamus (dTh) and ventral
thalamus (vTh), two major regions of the diencephalon, is characterized by their 
parcellation into distinct cell groups, or nuclei, that can be histologically
defined in postnatal animals. However, because of the complexity of dTh and vTh
and difficulties in histologically defining nuclei at early developmental stages,
our understanding of the mechanisms that control the parcellation of dTh and vTh 
and the differentiation of nuclei is limited. We have defined a set of regulatory
genes, which include five LIM-homeodomain transcription factors (Isl1, Lhx1,
Lhx2, Lhx5, and Lhx9) and three other genes (Gbx2, Ngn2, and Pax6), that are
differentially expressed in dTh and vTh of early postnatal mice in distinct but
overlapping patterns that mark nuclei or subsets of nuclei. These genes exhibit
differential expression patterns in dTh and vTh as early as embryonic day 10.5,
when neurogenesis begins; the expression of most of them is detected as
progenitor cells exit the cell cycle. Soon thereafter, their expression patterns 
are very similar to those that we observe postnatally, indicating that unique
combinations of these genes mark specific cell groups from the time they are
generated to their later differentiation into nuclei. Our findings suggest that
these genes act in a combinatorial manner to control the specification of
nuclei-specific properties of thalamic cells and the differentiation of nuclei
within dTh and vTh. These genes may also influence the pathfinding and targeting 
of thalamocortical axons through both cell-autonomous and non-autonomous
mechanisms.

PMID: 11306624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2001 Jan;17(1):190-207.

Pax6 regulates the identity of embryonic diencephalic neurons.

Mastick GS(1), Andrews GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, Nevada 89557, USA.
gmastick@unr.edu

The transcription factor Pax6 is expressed in discrete domains in the developing 
brain, generally limited to progenitor populations. However, in the embryonic
mouse diencephalon, Pax6 is not only expressed in neuroepithelial progenitors,
but also at high levels in a specific set of initial neurons. These neurons first
appeared on embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5) in the presumptive ventral thalamus and were
fated to become A13 dopaminergic neurons of the medial zona incerta. To further
characterize the initial differentiation of these neurons, and the function of
Pax6 in their formation, the expression patterns of a number of transcription
factors were described. The progenitor population was defined by reciprocal
overlapping expression gradients of Pax6 and Nkx2.2, and a subset of
proliferating progenitors were labeled with an antibody against DLX transcription
factors. The initial neurons expressed combinations of transcription factors,
including Pax6, DLX, and the LIM-domain proteins islet-1, Lhx1 (Lim1), and Lhx5
(Lim-2). Bromo-deoxyuridine (BrdU) labeling was used to follow the fate of a
cohort of proliferating cells, defining a step-wise sequence of gene activation
during differentiation. Pax6 up-regulation occurred only several hours
postdifferentiation. The loss of Pax6 altered progenitor specification, and the
Lhx1 neuronal marker was lost, indicating a role for Pax6 in the specification of
forebrain neuron identity.

PMID: 11161479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Gene. 2000 Dec 30;260(1-2):95-101.

Genomic structure, chromosomal localization and expression of the human
LIM-homeobox gene LHX5.

Zhao Y(1), Hermesz E, Yarolin MC, Westphal H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The LIM-homeobox gene Lhx5 plays an essential role in the regulation of neuronal 
differentiation and migration during development of the central nervous system.
Mice lacking Lhx5 function show severely disorganized brain morphology and are
impaired in cognition and motor coordination. In this study, we characterized the
cDNA and genomic organization of the human LHX5 gene and analyzed its expression 
and chromosomal location. The human gene was found to contain five exons encoding
a protein composed of 402 amino acids that is 98.8% identical to mouse Lhx5. By
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, LHX5 transcripts were detected
in fetal brain and in various regions of the adult central nervous system
including the spinal cord, the thalamus, and the cerebellum. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization mapped the LHX5 gene to chromosome 12, position 12q24.31-24.32.
These results provide a framework for future analysis of possible association of 
human hereditary disorders with mutations in LHX5.

PMID: 11137295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Genesis. 2000 May;27(1):6-11.

Evidence for the differential regulation of Nkx-6.1 expression in the ventral
spinal cord and foregut by Shh-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

Cai J, Xu X, Yin H, Wu R, Modderman G, Chen Y, Jensen J, Hui CC, Qiu M.

The Nkx-6.1 homeodomain transcription factor was previously shown to be expressed
in ventral neural progenitor cells and subsequently subsets of unidentified motor
neurons during early neural development. In this study, we identify a specific
subpopulation of motor neurons, the median half of the lateral motor neuron
column (LMCm), that retain a strong expression of Nkx-6.1. In addition, we report
novel patterns of Nkx-6.1 expression in several mesenchymal tissues surrounding
Sonic hedgehog (Shh)-expressing cells, including ventral spinal meninges,
esophageal mesenchyme, and dorsal tracheal mesenchyme. Whereas Shh signaling is
required for Nkx-6.1 expression in the ventral neural tube and spinal meninges,
an Shh-independent pathway appears to operate in regulating Nkx-6.1 expression in
the foregut. The persistent and robust expression of Nkx-6.1 in motor neurons and
mesenchymal cells suggests an important role for Nkx-6.1 in controlling cell fate
specification and differentiation. genesis 27:6-11, 2000.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10862150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Science. 1999 May 14;284(5417):1155-8.

Control of hippocampal morphogenesis and neuronal differentiation by the LIM
homeobox gene Lhx5.

Zhao Y(1), Sheng HZ, Amini R, Grinberg A, Lee E, Huang S, Taira M, Westphal H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The mammalian hippocampus contains the neural circuitry that is crucial for
cognitive functions such as learning and memory. The development of such
circuitry is dependent on the generation and correct placement of the appropriate
number and types of neurons. Mice lacking function of the LIM homeobox gene Lhx5 
showed a defect in hippocampus development. Hippocampal neural precursor cells
were specified and proliferated, but many of them failed to either exit the cell 
cycle or to differentiate and migrate properly. Lhx5 is therefore essential for
the regulation of precursor cell proliferation and the control of neuronal
differentiation and migration during hippocampal development.

PMID: 10325223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Apr;18(4):2298-308.

Shc and Enigma are both required for mitogenic signaling by Ret/ptc2.

Durick K(1), Gill GN, Taylor SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego,
La Jolla 92093-0654, USA.

Ret/ptc2 is a constitutively active, oncogenic form of the c-Ret receptor
tyrosine kinase. Like the other papillary thyroid carcinoma forms of Ret,
Ret/ptc2 is activated through fusion of the Ret tyrosine kinase domain to the
dimerization domain of another protein. Investigation of requirements for
Ret/ptc2 mitogenic activity, using coexpression with dominant negative forms of
Ras and Raf, indicated that these proteins are required for mitogenic signaling
by Ret/ptc2. Because activation of Ras requires recruitment of Grb2 and SOS to
the plasma membrane, the subcellular distribution of Ret/ptc2 was investigated,
and it was found to localize to the cell periphery. This localization was
mediated by association with Enigma via the Ret/ptc2 sequence containing tyrosine
586. Because Shc interacts with MEN2 forms of Ret, and because phosphorylation of
Shc results in Grb2 recruitment and subsequent signaling through Ras and Raf, the
potential interaction between Ret/ptc2 and Shc was investigated. The PTB domain
of Shc also interacted with Ret/ptc2 at tyrosine 586, and this association
resulted in tyrosine phosphorylation of Shc. Coexpression of chimeric proteins
demonstrated that mitogenic signaling from Ret/ptc2 required both recruitment of 
Shc and subcellular localization by Enigma. Because Shc and Enigma interact with 
the same site on a Ret/ptc2 monomer, dimerization of Ret/ptc2 allows assembly of 
molecular complexes that are properly localized via Enigma and transmit mitogenic
signals via Shc.

PMCID: PMC121481
PMID: 9528800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Dev Dyn. 1997 Feb;208(2):266-77.

Expression of murine Lhx5 suggests a role in specifying the forebrain.

Sheng HZ(1), Bertuzzi S, Chiang C, Shawlot W, Taira M, Dawid I, Westphal H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA.

A LIM homeobox gene, Lim5, is known to be expressed in the forebrain of Xenopus
and zebrafish (Toyama et al. [1995] Dev. Biol. 170:583-593). Results from
developmental and comparative studies of its mouse ortholog, Lhx5, indicate that 
this gene may play important roles in forebrain development. Lhx5 expression is
detected in the most anterior portion of the neural tube at the headfold stage,
overlapping partially with Otx2 expression domain. After neural tube closure,
Lhx5 is expressed as a transverse stripe, covering most of the diencephalic
primordium. This expression recedes to restricted areas as Dlx gene expression
occurs. By midgestation, both genes, Lhx5 and Dlx5, are expressed in the
diencephalon and ventral telencephalon in an alternating complementary pattern.
It may be that Dlx inhibits Lhx5, and this may represent a step of early
regionalization of the forebrain. Lhx5 is also expressed in midbrain, hindbrain, 
and spinal cord, overlapping extensively with Lhx1 starting from day E10.5 of
gestation. The early, persistent, and dynamic expression of Lhx5 suggests a
regulatory function in forebrain formation.

PMID: 9022063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Genomics. 1996 Sep 1;36(2):234-9.

Molecular cloning, structure, and chromosomal localization of the mouse
LIM/homeobox gene Lhx5.

Bertuzzi S(1), Sheng HZ, Copeland NG, Gilbert DJ, Jenkins NA, Taira M, Dawid IB, 
Westphal H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland, 20892, USA.

Lhx5, the mouse ortholog of the Xenopus Xlim-5, is a LIM/homeobox gene expressed 
in the central nervous system during both embryonic development and adulthood.
During development its domain of expression is mainly localized at the most
anterior portion of the neural tube, and it precedes the morphological
differentiation of the forebrain; for this reason we believe that Lhx5 could play
an important role in forebrain patterning. Here we present the structural
organization and the chromosomal localization of the Lhx5 gene. The gene is
composed of five exons spanning more than 10 kb of genomic sequence. The first
and second LIM domains are encoded by the first and second exon, while the codons
of the homeobox are split between the third and the fourth exons. The structure
of Lhx5 is similar to that of other LIM/homeodomain proteins, Lhx1/lim1 and
Lhx3/lim3, but differs from that of other LIM genes, such as mec3 and LMO1/Rbtn1,
in which the codons for the LIM domains are interrupted by introns. We have
mapped Lhx5 to the central region of mouse chromosome 5.

PMID: 8812449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Dev Biol. 1995 Aug;170(2):583-93.

The LIM class homeobox gene lim5: implied role in CNS patterning in Xenopus and
zebrafish.

Toyama R(1), Curtiss PE, Otani H, Kimura M, Dawid IB, Taira M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

LIM homeobox genes are characterized by encoding proteins in which two
cysteine-rich LIM domains are associated with a homeodomain. We report the
isolation of a gene, named Xlim-5 in Xenopus and lim5 in the zebrafish, that is
highly similar in sequence but quite distinct in expression pattern from the
previously described Xlim-1/lim1 gene. In both species studied the lim5 gene is
expressed in the entire ectoderm in the early gastrula embryo. The Xlim-5 gene is
activated in a cell autonomous manner in ectodermal cells, and this activation is
suppressed by the mesoderm inducer activin. During neurulation, expression of the
lim5 gene in both the frog and fish embryo is rapidly restricted to an anterior
region in the developing neural plate/keel. In the 2-day Xenopus and 24-hr
zebrafish embryo, this region becomes more sharply defined, forming a strongly
lim5-expressing domain in the diencephalon anterior to the midbrain-forebrain
boundary. In addition, regions of less intense lim5 expression are seen in the
zebrafish embryo in parts of the telencephalon, in the anterior diencephalon
coincident with the postoptic commissure, and in restricted regions of the
midbrain, hindbrain, and spinal cord. Expression in ventral forebrain is
abolished from the 5-somite stage onward in cyclops mutant fish. These results
imply a role for lim5 in the patterning of the nervous system, in particular in
the early specification of the diencephalon.

PMID: 7649385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


