
61. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011 Jan;127(1):254-61, 261.e1-6. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2010.10.009. Epub 2010 Dec 3.

A nonredundant role for mouse Serpinb3a in the induction of mucus production in
asthma.

Sivaprasad U(1), Askew DJ, Ericksen MB, Gibson AM, Stier MT, Brandt EB, Bass SA, 
Daines MO, Chakir J, Stringer KF, Wert SE, Whitsett JA, Le Cras TD, Wills-Karp M,
Silverman GA, Khurana Hershey GK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Asthma Research, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

BACKGROUND: Asthma is a major public health burden worldwide. Studies from our
group and others have demonstrated that SERPINB3 and SERPINB4 are induced in
patients with asthma; however, their mechanistic role in asthma has yet to be
determined.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the role of Serpin3a, the murine homolog of SERPINB3 and
SERPINB4, in asthma.
METHODS: We studied wild-type Balb/c and Serpinb3a-null mice in house dust mite
or IL-13-induced asthma models and evaluated airway hyperresponsiveness,
inflammation, and goblet cell hyperplasia.
RESULTS: Airway hyperresponsiveness and goblet cell hyperplasia were markedly
attenuated in the Serpinb3a-null mice compared with the wild-type mice after
allergen challenge, with minimal effects on inflammation. Expression of sterile
alpha motif pointed domain containing v-ets avian erythroblastosis virus E26
oncogene homolog transcription factor (SPDEF), a transcription factor that
mediates goblet cell hyperplasia, was decreased in the absence of Serpinb3a.
IL-13-treated Serpinb3a-null mice showed attenuated airway hyperresponsiveness,
inflammation, and mucus production.
CONCLUSION: Excessive mucus production and mucus plugging are key pathologic
features of asthma, yet the mechanisms responsible for mucus production are not
well understood. Our data reveal a novel nonredundant role for Serpinb3a in
mediating mucus production through regulation of SPDEF expression. This pathway
may be used to target mucus hypersecretion effectively.

Copyright Â© 2010 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3058372
PMID: 21126757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. PLoS Genet. 2010 Sep 16;6(9):e1001125. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001125.

ETS-4 is a transcriptional regulator of life span in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Thyagarajan B(1), Blaszczak AG, Chandler KJ, Watts JL, Johnson WE, Graves BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, Department of Oncological Sciences, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

Aging is a complex phenotype responsive to a plethora of environmental inputs;
yet only a limited number of transcriptional regulators are known to influence
life span. How the downstream expression programs mediated by these factors (or
others) are coordinated into common or distinct set of aging effectors is an
addressable question in model organisms, such as C. elegans. Here, we establish
the transcription factor ETS-4, an ortholog of vertebrate SPDEF, as a longevity
determinant. Adult worms with ets-4 mutations had a significant extension of mean
life span. Restoring ETS-4 activity in the intestine, but not neurons, of ets-4
mutant worms rescued life span to wild-type levels. Using RNAi, we demonstrated
that ets-4 is required post-developmentally to regulate adult life span; thus
uncoupling the role of ETS-4 in aging from potential functions in worm intestinal
development. Seventy ETS-4-regulated genes, identified by gene expression
profiling of two distinct ets-4 alleles and analyzed by bioinformatics, were
enriched for known longevity effectors that function in lipid transport, lipid
metabolism, and innate immunity. Putative target genes were enriched for ones
that change expression during normal aging, the majority of which are controlled 
by the GATA factors. Also, some ETS-4-regulated genes function downstream of the 
FOXO factor, DAF-16 and the insulin/IGF-1 signaling pathway. However, epistasis
and phenotypic analyses indicate that ets-4 functioned in parallel to the
insulin/IGF-1 receptor, daf-2 and akt-1/2 kinases. Furthermore, ets-4 required
daf-16 to modulate aging, suggesting overlap in function at the level of common
targets that affect life span. In conclusion, ETS-4 is a new transcriptional
regulator of aging, which shares transcriptional targets with GATA and FOXO
factors, suggesting that overlapping pathways direct common sets of
lifespan-related genes.

PMCID: PMC2940738
PMID: 20862312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Urol. 2010 Nov;184(5):2158-64. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2010.06.093. Epub 2010 Sep
17.

Cardiac glycosides decrease prostate specific antigen expression by
down-regulation of prostate derived Ets factor.

Juang HH(1), Lin YF, Chang PL, Tsui KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Chang Gung University, Kwei-Shan, Taiwan, Republic of
China.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2010 Nov;184(5):1831-2.

PURPOSE: While cardiac glycosides are the mainstay of congestive heart failure
treatment, early studies showed that pharmacological doses of cardiac glycosides 
inhibited prostate cancer cell line proliferation. We evaluated the mechanisms of
cardiac glycosides, including digoxin, digitoxin and ouabain (Sigma®), on
prostate specific antigen gene expression in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We cultured LNCaP cells (ATCC®) and used them to determine
the effect of cardiac glycosides on prostate derived Ets factor and prostate
specific antigen expression. We determined prostate derived Ets factor and
prostate specific antigen expression by reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction, immunoblot, transient gene expression assay or enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: Noncytotoxic doses (100 nM) of cardiac glycosides for 24 hours inhibited
prostate specific antigen secretion by LNCaP cells. Reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and immunoblot revealed that cardiac
glycosides significantly down-regulated prostate specific antigen and prostate
derived Ets factor expression. Transient gene expression assays showed that
prostate derived Ets factor over expression enhanced prostate specific antigen
promoter activity. However, prostate specific antigen and prostate derived Ets
factor gene promoter activity was attenuated when LNCaP cells were treated with
100 nM cardiac glycosides. When LNCaP cells were treated with 25 nM digitoxin or 
digoxin for 60 hours, prostate specific antigen secretion decreased by 30%.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that cardiac glycoside inhibition of prostate
specific antigen gene expression may be caused by the down-regulation of prostate
derived Ets factor gene expression. When cells were chronically treated with
digoxin or digitoxin at concentrations close to or at therapeutic plasma levels, 
prostate specific antigen secretion decreased. This phenomenon merits further
study to determine whether it occurs in men on cardiac glycoside therapy.

Copyright © 2010 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20850842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Biol Chem. 2010 Nov 5;285(45):35047-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.164541. Epub 2010
Aug 26.

Requirement of the epithelium-specific Ets transcription factor Spdef for mucous 
gland cell function in the gastric antrum.

Horst D(1), Gu X, Bhasin M, Yang Q, Verzi M, Lin D, Joseph M, Zhang X, Chen W, Li
YP, Shivdasani RA, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Mucus-secreting cells of the stomach epithelium provide a protective barrier
against damage that might result from bacterial colonization or other stimuli.
Impaired barrier function contributes to chronic inflammation and cancer.
Knock-out mice for the epithelium-specific transcription factor Spdef (also
called Pdef) have defects in terminal differentiation of intestinal and bronchial
secretory cells. We sought to determine the physiologic function of Spdef in the 
stomach, another site of significant levels of Spdef expression. We used in situ 
hybridization and immunohistochemistry to localize Spdef-expressing cells in the 
mouse stomach; targeted gene disruption to generate mice lacking Spdef; and
histologic, immunologic, and transcriptional profiling approaches to determine
the requirements of Spdef in stomach epithelial homeostasis. In wild-type mice,
Spdef RNA and protein are expressed predominantly in mucous gland cells of the
antrum and in mucous neck cells of the glandular corpus. Within 1.5 years, nearly
half of homozygous mutant mice developed profound mucosal hyperplasia of the
gastric antrum. Submucosal infiltration of inflammatory cells preceded antral
hyperplasia by several weeks. The absence of Spdef impaired terminal maturation
of antral mucous gland cells, as reflected in reduced expression of Muc6 and Tff2
and reduced numbers of secretory granules. Antral gene expression abnormalities
overlapped significantly with those in Spdef(-/-) colon, including genes
implicated in secretory granule traffic and functions. Spdef is required for
terminal maturation of antral mucous gland cells to protect animals from gastric 
inflammation and resulting hyperplasia. These requirements parallel Spdef
functions in secretory intestinal cells and suggest a common molecular mechanism 
for maturation of gastrointestinal secretory lineages.

PMCID: PMC2966119
PMID: 20801882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Eur J Med Res. 2010;15:277-86.

Methylated APC and GSTP1 genes in serum DNA correlate with the presence of
circulating blood tumor cells and are associated with a more aggressive and
advanced breast cancer disease.

Matuschek C(1), Bölke E, Lammering G, Gerber PA, Peiper M, Budach W, Taskin H,
Prisack HB, Schieren G, Orth K, Bojar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Therapy and Radiation Oncology, University of
Düsseldorf, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Tumor-related methylated DNA and circulating tumor cells (CTC) in the
peripheral blood might be of prognostic importance in breast cancer. Thus, the
aim of our study was to examine free methylated DNA and CTC in the blood from
breast cancer patients and to correlate it with clinicopathological features
known to influence prognosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We prospectively obtained serum samples from 85 patients
with breast cancer and 22 healthy volunteers. Sera were analysed by methylation
specific PCR (MethyLight PCR) for five genes: adenomatous polyposis coli (APC),
ras association domain family protein 1A (RASSF1A), estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1),
CDKN2A (p16) and glutathione s-transferase pi 1 (GSTP1). Beta actin (ACTB) served
as control. In parallel matched peripheral blood of 63 patients was used to assay
for circulating tumor cells in the peripheral blood by a modified immunomagnetic 
AdnaTest BreastCancerSelect with PCR detection for EPCAM, MUC1, MGB1 and SPDEF.
RESULTS: A hypermethylation in the APC gene in 29% (25/85), in RASSF1A in 26%
(22/85), in GSTP1 in 18% (14/76) and in ESR1 in 38% (32/85) of all breast cancer 
patients was detected. No hypermethylation of CDKN2A was found (0/25). Blood
samples of patients were defined CTC positive by detecting the EPCAM 13% (8/63), 
MUC1 16% (10/63), MGB 9% (5/55), SPDEF 12% (7/58) and in 27% detecting one or
more genes (15/55). A significant difference was seen in methylated APC DNA
between cancer patients and healthy volunteers. Moreover, methylated APC, RASSF1 
and CTC were significantly different in metastatic versus non-metastatic disease.
In addition, the presence of methylated APC, RASSF1A and CTC correlated
significantly with AJCC-staging (p = 0.001, p = 0.031 and 0.002, respectively).
High incidences of methylations were found for the genes RASSF1 and ESR1 in
healthy individuals (both 23% 5/22). Methylated GSTP1 was predominantly found in 
the serum of patients with large primaries (p = 0.023) and was highly
significantly correlated with positive Her2/neu status (p = 0.003). Elevated
serum CA15.3 was strongly correlated with methylated APC and CTC detection (both 
p = 0.000). Methylated ESR1 failed to exhibit significant correlations with any
of the above mentioned parameters. The presence of CTC in peripheral blood was
significantly associated with methylated APC (p = 0.012) and methylated GSTP1 (p 
= 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The detection of methylated APC and GSTP1 DNA in serum correlated
with the presence of CTC in the blood of breast cancer patients. Both methylated 
DNA and CTC correlated with a more aggressive tumor biology and advanced disease.

PMCID: PMC3351951
PMID: 20696638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jun 15;9:148. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-148.

Loss of PDEF, a prostate-derived Ets factor is associated with aggressive
phenotype of prostate cancer: regulation of MMP 9 by PDEF.

Johnson TR(1), Koul S, Kumar B, Khandrika L, Venezia S, Maroni PD, Meacham RB,
Koul HK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, University of Colorado Denver
School of Medicine, Denver Veterans Administrative Medical Center, and University
of Colorado Comprehensive Cancer Center, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prostate-derived Ets factor (PDEF) is expressed in tissues of high
epithelial content including prostate, although its precise function has not been
fully established. Conventional therapies produce a high rate of cure for
patients with localized prostate cancer, but there is, at present, no effective
treatment for intervention in metastatic prostate cancer. These facts underline
the need to develop new approaches for early diagnosis of aggressive prostate
cancer patients, and mechanism based anti-metastasis therapies that will improve 
the outlook for hormone-refractory prostate cancer. In this study we evaluated
role of prostate-derived Ets factor (PDEF) in prostate cancer.
RESULTS: We observed decreased PDEF expression in prostate cancer cell lines
correlated with increased aggressive phenotype, and complete loss of PDEF protein
in metastatic prostate cancer cell lines. Loss of PDEF expression was confirmed
in high Gleason Grade prostate cancer samples by immuno-histochemical methods.
Reintroduction of PDEF profoundly affected cell behavior leading to less invasive
phenotypes in three dimensional cultures. In addition, PDEF expressing cells had 
altered cell morphology, decreased FAK phosphorylation and decreased colony
formation, cell migration, and cellular invasiveness. In contrast PDEF knockdown 
resulted in increased migration and invasion as well as clonogenic activity. Our 
results also demonstrated that PDEF downregulated MMP9 promoter activity,
suppressed MMP9 mRNA expression, and resulted in loss of MMP9 activity in
prostate cancer cells. These results suggested that loss of PDEF might be
associated with increased MMP9 expression and activity in aggressive prostate
cancer. To confirm results we investigated MMP9 expression in clinical samples of
prostate cancer. Results of these studies show increased MMP9 expression
correlated with advanced Gleason grade. Taken together our results demonstrate
decreased PDEF expression and increased MMP9 expression during the transition to 
aggressive prostate cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies demonstrate for the first time negative regulation of 
MMP9 expression by PDEF, and that PDEF expression was lost in aggressive prostate
cancer and was inversely associated with MMP9 expression in clinical samples of
prostate cancer. Based on these exciting results, we propose that loss of PDEF
along with increased MMP9 expression should serve as novel markers for early
detection of aggressive prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2904725
PMID: 20550708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 9;285(15):11258-69. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.073932. Epub 2010
Feb 5.

Transcriptional regulation of p21/CIP1 cell cycle inhibitor by PDEF controls cell
proliferation and mammary tumor progression.

Schaefer JS(1), Sabherwal Y, Shi HY, Sriraman V, Richards J, Minella A, Turner
DP, Watson DK, Zhang M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The Ets family of transcription factors control a myriad of cellular processes
and contribute to the underlying genetic loss of cellular homeostasis resulting
in cancer. PDEF (prostate-derived Ets factor) has been under investigation for
its role in tumor development and progression. However, the role of PDEF in
cancer development has been controversial. Some reports link PDEF to tumor
promoter, and others show tumor-suppressing functions in various systems under
different conditions. So far, there has been no conclusive evidence from in vivo 
experiments to prove the role of PDEF. We have used both in vitro and in vivo
systems to provide a conclusive role of PDEF in the progression process.
PDEF-expressing cells block the cell growth rate, and this retardation was
reversible when PDEF expression was silenced with PDEF-specific small interfering
RNA. When these PDEF-expressing cells were orthotopically implanted into the
mouse mammary gland, tumor incidence and growth rate were significantly retarded.
Cell cycle analysis revealed that PDEF expression partially blocked cell cycle
progression at G(1)/S without an effect on apoptosis. PDEF overexpression
resulted in an increase in p21/CIP1 at both the mRNA and protein levels,
resulting in decreased Cdk2 activity. Promoter deletion analysis, electrophoresis
mobility shift assays, and chromatin immunoprecipitation studies identified the
functional Ets DNA binding site at -2118 bp of the p21/CIP1 gene promoter. This
site is capable of binding and responding to PDEF. Furthermore, we silenced
p21/CIP1 expression in PDEF-overexpressing cells by small interfering RNA.
p21-silenced PDEF cells exhibited significantly increased cell growth in vitro
and in vivo, demonstrating the p21 regulation by PDEF as a key player. These
experiments identified PDEF as a new transcription factor that directly regulates
p21/CIP1 expression under non-stressed conditions. This study conclusively proves
that PDEF is a breast tumor suppressor for the first time using both in vitro and
in vivo systems. PDEF can be further developed as a target for designing
therapeutic intervention of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2857004
PMID: 20139077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. PLoS One. 2009 Dec 14;4(12):e8248. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008248.

Sox2 is required for maintenance and differentiation of bronchiolar Clara,
ciliated, and goblet cells.

Tompkins DH(1), Besnard V, Lange AW, Wert SE, Keiser AR, Smith AN, Lang R,
Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology in the Perinatal Institute , Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center and the University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America.

The bronchioles of the murine lung are lined by a simple columnar epithelium
composed of ciliated, Clara, and goblet cells that together mediate barrier
function, mucociliary clearance and innate host defense, vital for pulmonary
homeostasis. In the present work, we demonstrate that expression of Sox2 in Clara
cells is required for the differentiation of ciliated, Clara, and goblet cells
that line the bronchioles of the postnatal lung. The gene was selectively deleted
in Clara cells utilizing Scgb1a1-Cre, causing the progressive loss of Sox2 in the
bronchioles during perinatal and postnatal development. The rate of bronchiolar
cell proliferation was decreased and associated with the formation of an
undifferentiated, cuboidal-squamous epithelium lacking the expression of markers 
of Clara cells (Scgb1a1), ciliated cells (FoxJ1 and alpha-tubulin), and goblet
cells (Spdef and Muc5AC). By adulthood, bronchiolar cell numbers were decreased
and Sox2 was absent in extensive regions of the bronchiolar epithelium, at which 
time residual Sox2 expression was primarily restricted to selective niches of
CGRP staining neuroepithelial cells. Allergen-induced goblet cell differentiation
and mucus production was absent in the respiratory epithelium lacking Sox2. In
vitro, Sox2 activated promoter-luciferase reporter constructs for differentiation
markers characteristic of Clara, ciliated, and goblet cells, Scgb1a1, FoxJ1, and 
Agr2, respectively. Sox2 physically interacted with Smad3 and inhibited
TGF-beta1/Smad3-mediated transcriptional activity in vitro, a pathway that
negatively regulates proliferation. Sox2 is required for proliferation and
differentiation of Clara cells that serve as the progenitor cells from which
Clara, ciliated, and goblet cells are derived.

PMCID: PMC2788414
PMID: 20011520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2010 Apr;56(2-3):59-71. doi: 10.1007/s12013-009-9071-6.

Secreted phosphoprotein 1 upstream invasive network construction and analysis of 
lung adenocarcinoma compared with human normal adjacent tissues by integrative
biocomputation.

Sun Y(1), Wang L, Jiang M, Huang J, Liu Z, Wolfl S.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Center, School of Electronics Engineering, Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China.

The aim of this study is to set up single molecular secreted phosphoprotein 1
(SPP1) upstream invasive network of lung adenocarcinoma. This paper proposed an
integrated method based on linear programming and a decomposition procedure with 
integrated analysis of the significant function cluster using Kappa statistics
and fuzzy heuristic clustering. Our study proved that only modules appearing in
lung adenocarcinoma include cytokine module (CXCL13, GREM1_2 inhibition), cell
adhesion module (COL11A1_2 activation; CDH3 inhibition), and receptor binding
module (NMU activation; CXCL13, GREM1_2 inhibition), which increase the invasion 
of cancer cell. We compared skeletal development, signal, biological regulation, 
sequence variant modules between human normal adjacent tissues and lung
adenocarcinoma. SPP1 skeletal development module appears in human normal adjacent
tissues (COL11A1_1 activation; COL10A1 inhibition), whereas in lung
adenocarcinoma (COL11A1_2, COL1A2 activation); signal module appears in human
normal adjacent tissues (COL11A1_1, CXCL13, MMP11, SPINK1 activation; COL10A1,
COL3A1 inhibition), whereas in lung adenocarcinoma (COL11A1_2, COL1A2, MMP12
activation; CDH3, CXCL13, GREM1_2, MMP11, SPINK1 inhibition); biological
regulation module appears in human normal adjacent tissues (CXCL13, MKI67, PYCR1 
activation; NEK2, SPDEF, TOP2A_2, TOX3_1 inhibition), whereas in lung
adenocarcinoma (HMGB3, MKI67, NMU, PYCR1, TOX3_2 activation; CXCL13, SPDEF,
TOP2A_2 inhibition); sequence variant module appears in human normal adjacent
tissues (COL11A1_1, MKI67, MMP11 activation; ASPM, COL10A1, COL3A1, NEK2,
TMPRSS4, TOP2A_2 inhibition), whereas in lung adenocarcinoma (COL11A1_2, COL1A2, 
HMMR, MKI67, MMP12 activation; ABCC3, ASPM, CDH3, MMP11, TOP2A_2 inhibition). It 
can be deduced that modules above in human normal adjacent tissues reflect the
invasive inhibition of normal cells, whereas in lung adenocarcinoma increase the 
invasion of cancer cell. Our study of SPP1 upstream invasive network may be
useful to identify novel and potentially targets for prognosis and therapy of
lung adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 19949890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Dec 15;108(6):1389-98. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22371.

PDEF is a negative regulator of colon cancer cell growth and migration.

Moussa O(1), Turner DP, Feldman RJ, Sementchenko VI, McCarragher BD, Desouki MM, 
Fraig M, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

ETS is a family of transcriptional regulators with functions in most biological
processes. Dysregulated ETS factor function leads to altered expression of
multiple genes that play critical roles in many of the processes required for
cancer progression. While the Ets family gene, prostate-derived ETS factor
(PDEF), is expressed in epithelial tissues including prostate, breast, and colon,
PDEF protein expression has been found to be reduced or lost during prostate and 
breast cancer progression. The goal of this study was to examine the expression
and biologic impact of altered PDEF expression in colon cancer. PDEF mRNA and
protein are not detectable in several colon-cancer-derived cell lines.
Re-expression of PDEF in colon cancer cells inhibits growth and migration. Growth
affects are due to altered cellular proliferation, indicated by increased altered
cell population in G(1) and S phases of the cell cycle, as well as increased
apoptosis. Relevant to its modulation of growth and migration phenotypes, PDEF
expression resulted in altered expression of genes with established roles in cell
cycle, motility, and invasion. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation studies
show that p21 and urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) are direct PDEF
transcriptional targets. While non-tumor colon epithelium expresses PDEF mRNA and
protein, the majority of tumors showed decreased mRNA and/or protein expression. 
In human tumor tissue samples, PDEF expression was inversely correlated with the 
expression levels of uPA. Collectively, the data support the model that PDEF is a
negative regulator of tumor progression by modulating the expression of growth
and migration promoting genes.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3348703
PMID: 19830706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Feb 1;316(3):452-65. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.09.020. Epub
2009 Sep 26.

SAM pointed domain ETS factor (SPDEF) regulates terminal differentiation and
maturation of intestinal goblet cells.

Noah TK(1), Kazanjian A, Whitsett J, Shroyer NF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center
and University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: SPDEF (also termed PDEF or PSE) is an ETS family
transcription factor that regulates gene expression in the prostate and goblet
cell hyperplasia in the lung. Spdef has been reported to be expressed in the
intestine. In this paper, we identify an important role for Spdef in regulating
intestinal epithelial cell homeostasis and differentiation.
METHODS: SPDEF expression was inhibited in colon cancer cells to determine its
ability to control goblet cell gene activation. The effects of transgenic
expression of Spdef on intestinal differentiation and homeostasis were
determined.
RESULTS: In LS174T colon cancer cells treated with Notch/gamma-secretase
inhibitor to activate goblet cell gene expression, shRNAs that inhibited SPDEF
also repressed expression of goblet cell genes AGR2, MUC2, RETLNB, and SPINK4.
Transgenic expression of Spdef caused the expansion of intestinal goblet cells
and corresponding reduction in Paneth, enteroendocrine, and absorptive
enterocytes. Spdef inhibited proliferation of intestinal crypt cells without
induction of apoptosis. Prolonged expression of the Spdef transgene caused a
progressive reduction in the number of crypts that expressed Spdef, consistent
with its inhibitory effects on cell proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Spdef was sufficient to inhibit proliferation of intestinal
progenitors and induce differentiation into goblet cells; SPDEF was required for 
activation of goblet cell associated genes in vitro. These data support a model
in which Spdef promotes terminal differentiation into goblet cells of a common
goblet/Paneth progenitor.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3004755
PMID: 19786015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Immunol Res. 2010 Mar;46(1-3):206-15. doi: 10.1007/s12026-009-8129-2.

PDEF and PDEF-induced proteins as candidate tumor antigens for T cell and
antibody-mediated immunotherapy of breast cancer.

Sood AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263,
USA. Ashwani.sood@roswellpark.org

Novel breast tumor antigens are needed to develop T cell and antibody-based
vaccine immunotherapy approach against breast cancer. To this purpose, we have
previously shown that PDEF is frequently over expressed in human breast tumors
and exhibits highly restricted expression in normal human tissues that is
primarily limited to normal prostate. Moreover, PDEF expression correlates with
poor overall survival for breast cancer patients. Additionally, Pse
(prostate-specific Ets, mouse homologue of PDEF) is immunogenic in female mice
and PDEF sequence contains HLA-A2 binding potentially immunogenic peptides.
Together, these observations support PDEF as a novel candidate breast tumor
antigen. Further, we have identified certain PDEF-induced proteins including
CEACAM6, B7-H4, and S100A7 as additional candidate breast tumor antigens.

PMID: 19763888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Clin Invest. 2009 Oct;119(10):2914-24. doi: 10.1172/JCI39731. Epub 2009 Sep 14.

SPDEF is required for mouse pulmonary goblet cell differentiation and regulates a
network of genes associated with mucus production.

Chen G(1), Korfhagen TR, Xu Y, Kitzmiller J, Wert SE, Maeda Y, Gregorieff A,
Clevers H, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)The Perinatal Institute, Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center and the University of Cincinnati School of Medicine, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Various acute and chronic inflammatory stimuli increase the number and activity
of pulmonary mucus-producing goblet cells, and goblet cell hyperplasia and excess
mucus production are central to the pathogenesis of chronic pulmonary diseases.
However, little is known about the transcriptional programs that regulate goblet 
cell differentiation. Here, we show that SAM-pointed domain-containing Ets-like
factor (SPDEF) controls a transcriptional program critical for pulmonary goblet
cell differentiation in mice. Initial cell-lineage-tracing analysis identified
nonciliated secretory epithelial cells, known as Clara cells, as the progenitors 
of goblet cells induced by pulmonary allergen exposure in vivo. Furthermore, in
vivo expression of SPDEF in Clara cells caused rapid and reversible goblet cell
differentiation in the absence of cell proliferation. This was associated with
enhanced expression of genes regulating goblet cell differentiation and protein
glycosylation, including forkhead box A3 (Foxa3), anterior gradient 2 (Agr2), and
glucosaminyl (N-acetyl) transferase 3, mucin type (Gcnt3). Consistent with these 
findings, levels of SPDEF and FOXA3 were increased in mouse goblet cells after
sensitization with pulmonary allergen, and the proteins were colocalized in
goblet cells lining the airways of patients with chronic lung diseases. Deletion 
of the mouse Spdef gene resulted in the absence of goblet cells in
tracheal/laryngeal submucosal glands and in the conducting airway epithelium
after pulmonary allergen exposure in vivo. These data show that SPDEF plays a
critical role in regulating a transcriptional network mediating the goblet cell
differentiation and mucus hyperproduction associated with chronic pulmonary
disorders.

PMCID: PMC2752084
PMID: 19759516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Eur J Med Res. 2009 Sep 28;14(10):426-32.

Gene expression of circulating tumour cells in breast cancer patients.

Bölke E(1), Orth K, Gerber PA, Lammering G, Mota R, Peiper M, Matuschek C, Budach
W, Rusnak E, Shaikh S, Dogan B, Prisack HB, Bojar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Therapy and Radiation Oncology, University of
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The diagnostic tools to predict the prognosis in patients suffering
from breast cancer (BC) need further improvements. New technological achievements
like the gene profiling of circulating tumour cells (CTC) could help identify new
prognostic markers in the clinical setting. Furthermore, gene expression patterns
of CTC might provide important informations on the mechanisms of tumour cell
metastasation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed realtime-PCR and multiplex-PCR analyses
following immunomagnetic separation of CTC. Peripheral blood (PB) samples of 63
patients with breast cancer of various stages were analyzed and compared to a
control group of 14 healthy individuals. After reverse-transcription, we
performed multiplex PCR using primers for the genes ga733.3, muc-1 and c-erbB2.
Mammaglobin1, spdef and c-erbB2 were analyzed applying realtime-PCR.
RESULTS: ga733.2 overexpression was found in 12.7% of breast cancer cases, muc-1 
in 15.9%, mgb1 in 9.1% and spdef in 12.1%. In this study, c-erbB2 did not show
any significant correlation to BC, possibly due to a highly ambient expression.
Besides single gene analyses, gene profiles were additionally evaluated. Highly
significant correlations to BC were found in single gene analyses of ga733.2 and 
muc-1 and in gene profile analyses of ga733.3*muc-1 and GA7
ga733.3*muc-1*mgb1*spdef.
CONCLUSION: Our study reveals that the single genes ga733.3, muc-1 and the gene
profiles ga733.3*muc-1 and ga733.3*3muc-1*mgb1*spdef can serve as markers for the
detection of CTC in BC. The multigene analyses found highly positive levels in BC
patients. Our study indicates that not single gene analyses but subtle patterns
of multiple genes lead to rising accuracy and low loss of specificity in
detection of breast cancer cases.

PMCID: PMC3352225
PMID: 19748849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Eur J Med Res. 2009 Aug 12;14(8):359-63.

Gene expression of circulating tumour cells and its correlation with tumour stage
in breast cancer patients.

Bölke E(1), Orth K, Gerber PA, Lammering G, Mota R, Peiper M, Matuschek C, Budach
W, Rusnak E, Shaikh S, Dogan B, Prisack HB, Bojar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Therapy and Radiation Oncology, University of
Düsseldorf, Hans-Günther-Sohl-Str. 12, 40235 Düsseldorf, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) represents one of the leading causes of cancer
related deaths worldwide. New tools for diagnostic staging and therapeutic
monitoring are needed to improve individualized therapies and improve clinical
outcome. The analyses of circulating tumour cells may provide important
prognostic information in the clinical setting.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Circulating tumour cells (CTC) of 63 BC patients were
isolated from peripheral blood (PB) through immunomagnetic separation.
Subsequently, RT-PCR or mPCR for the genes ga733.2, muc-1, c-erbB2, mgb-1, spdef 
and c-erbB2 were performed. Subsequently, expression data were correlated with
the tumour stages. Fourteen healthy individuals served as controls.
RESULTS: Significant correlations with tumour stages were found in single gene
analyses of ga733.2, muc-1 and in multi-gene analyses of ga733.2/muc-1/mgb1/
spdef. Furthermore, a significant correlation of Ca 15-3 and all studied genes
was also observed.
CONCLUSION: Herein, we demonstrated a positive correlation of a gene signature
consisting of ga733.2, muc-1, mgb1 and spdef and advanced stages of BC. Moreover,
all studied genes and gene patterns revealed a significant correlation with Ca
15-3 positive cases.

PMCID: PMC3352167
PMID: 19666396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biochem Soc Trans. 2009 Aug;37(Pt 4):877-81. doi: 10.1042/BST0370877.

Regulation of mucin expression in respiratory diseases.

Turner J(1), Jones CE.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes of Biomedical Research, Respiratory Diseases Area,
Horsham, West Sussex RH12 5AB, UK. jonathan.turner@novartis.com

Respiratory diseases such as asthma and COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease) are characterized by increased numbers of goblet cells and excessive
mucus production, which contribute to the underlying disease pathology. Mucins
form a major component of the mucus contributing to its viscoelastic properties, 
and in the airways the mucins MUC5AC and MUC5B are found at increased levels in
both asthmatic and COPD subjects. A diverse range of stimuli have been shown to
regulate MUC5AC expression and cause increases in the number of mucus-producing
goblet cells. Perhaps the best characterized of these mediators is the cytokine
IL (interleukin)-13, which causes increases in MUC5AC-expressing goblet cells in 
the airways. Several transcription factors have been linked with goblet cell
formation and mucus production and include STAT6 (signal transducer and activator
of transcription 6), FOXA2 (forkhead box A2) and the SPDEF [SAM (sterile alpha
motif) domain-containing prostate-derived Ets factor]. In mouse airways, goblet
cells are normally rare or absent, but increase rapidly in number in response to 
certain stimuli. The origins of these goblet cells are not well understood,
although Clara cells and ciliated cells have been implicated as goblet cell
progenitors. An understanding of the origin and processes regulating goblet cell 
formation in human airway epithelial cells has important implications for the
identification of therapeutic targets to treat respiratory diseases.

PMID: 19614611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Gastroenterology. 2009 Oct;137(4):1333-45.e1-3. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2009.06.044. Epub 2009 Jun 21.

The ets-domain transcription factor Spdef promotes maturation of goblet and
paneth cells in the intestinal epithelium.

Gregorieff A(1), Stange DE, Kujala P, Begthel H, van den Born M, Korving J,
Peters PJ, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Stem cells within the intestinal epithelium generate daughter 
cells that undergo lineage commitment and maturation through the combined action 
of the Wnt and Notch signaling cascades. Both pathways, in turn, regulate
transcription factor networks that further define differentiation toward either
enterocytes or 1 of 3 secretory cell lineages (Paneth, goblet, or enteroendocrine
cells). In this study, we investigated the role of the Wnt-responsive, Ets-domain
transcription factor Spdef in the differentiation of goblet and Paneth cells.
METHODS: The in vivo function of Spdef was examined by disrupting the Spdef gene 
in mice (Spdef(-/-) mice) and analyzing the intestinal phenotype using a range of
histologic techniques and DNA microarray profiling.
RESULTS: In accordance with expression data, we found that loss of Spdef severely
impaired the maturation of goblet and Paneth cells and, conversely, led to an
accumulation of immature secretory progenitors. Spdef appears to positively and
negatively regulate a specific subset of goblet and Paneth cell genes, including 
Cryptdins, Mmp7, Ang4, Kallikreins, and Muc2.
CONCLUSIONS: Spdef acts downstream of Math1 to promote terminal differentiation
of a secretory progenitor pool into Paneth and goblet cells.

PMID: 19549527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2010 Mar;42(3):268-75. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2009-0151TR. 
Epub 2009 Jun 11.

Advances in mucous cell metaplasia: a plug for mucus as a therapeutic focus in
chronic airway disease.

Curran DR(1), Cohn L.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Mucous cell metaplasia is induced in response to harmful insults and provides
front-line protection to clear the airway of toxic substances and cellular
debris. In chronic airway diseases mucous metaplasia persists and results in
airway obstruction and contributes significantly to morbidity and mortality.
Mucus hypersecretion involves increased expression of mucin genes, and increased 
mucin production and release. The past decade has seen significant advances in
our understanding of the molecular mechanisms by which these events occur.
Inflammation stimulates epidermal growth factor receptor activation and IL-13 to 
induce both Clara and ciliated cells to transition into goblet cells through the 
coordinated actions of FoxA2, TTF-1, SPDEF, and GABA(A)R. Ultimately, these steps
lead to up-regulation of MUC5AC expression, and increased mucin in goblet cell
granules that fuse to the plasma membrane through actions of MARCKS, SNAREs, and 
Munc proteins. Blockade of mucus in exacerbations of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease may affect morbidity. Development of new therapies 
to target mucus production and secretion are now possible given the advances in
our understanding of molecular mechanisms of mucous metaplasia. We now have a
greater incentive to focus on inhibition of mucus as a therapy for chronic airway
diseases.

PMCID: PMC2830403
PMID: 19520914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009 Jun;18(6):1899-903. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0055.

Sam-pointed domain containing Ets transcription factor in luminal breast cancer
pathogenesis.

Sood AK(1), Wang J, Mhawech-Fauceglia P, Jana B, Liang P, Geradts J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263,
USA. ashwani.sood@roswellpark.org

We previously described frequent overexpression of Sam-pointed domain containing 
Ets transcription factor (SPDEF), also known as PDEF, in human breast cancer, and
suggested a role for this transcription factor in breast tumor progression. To
seek evidence in support of this hypothesis, the MCF-12A breast epithelial cell
line was transfected with an SPDEF expression plasmid or with control vector
plasmid and the transfected cells tested for their tumorigenic growth in vivo.
The data showed that SPDEF expression in MCF-12A cells induced accelerated tumor 
growth in severe combined immune deficient mice compared with vector-transfected 
MCF-12A cells. Furthermore, Gene Expression Omnibus and Oncomine databases were
mined to determine any correlation between SPDEF expression levels and clinical
outcome. High SPDEF expression correlated with poor overall survival of patients 
with estrogen receptor+ breast cancer, in three independent data sets. In
contrast, little correlation was observed between SPDEF expression and cancer
relapse or remote metastases. SPDEF expression was further found to be restricted
to tumors arising in the luminal epithelial lineage including estrogen receptor+ 
luminal subtype breast tumors, Her2/neu-positive tumors, and apocrine carcinomas.
In contrast, little SPDEF expression was found in the basal subtype of breast
tumors. Based on these results, we hypothesize that SPDEF has a function in the
specification of the progenitor cells of the luminal epithelial lineage that
become targets of oncogenesis in luminal breast cancer.

PMID: 19505923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Proteome Res. 2009 Mar;8(3):1327-37. doi: 10.1021/pr800683b.

Proteomic analysis of a PDEF Ets transcription factor-interacting protein
complex.

Cho JY(1), Lee M, Ahn JM, Park ES, Cho JH, Lee SJ, Kim BG, Heo SH, Park HJ,
Zerbini LF, Hwang D, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National University
and ProtAn, Daegu 700-422, Korea.

Ets proteins are a family of transcription factors that share an 85 amino acid
conserved DNA binding domain, the ETS domain. The 27 known human Ets
transcription factors control multiple biological processes, including cellular
proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, angiogenesis, transformation, and
invasion. Overexpression of some Ets genes has been linked to numerous
malignancies, including breast cancers. The prostate derived Ets transcription
factor (PDEF) is reported to be a breast and prostate tumor-associated Ets
factor. To understand the roles of PDEF in breast cancers, we transiently
overexpressed PDEF in MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells by adenoviral-mediated
gene delivery. PDEF binding protein complexes were isolated by
immunoprecipitation and PDEF-interacting proteins were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.
After subtracting the proteins binding nonspecifically to antibody-bead
complexes, we identified 286 proteins in the PDEF-associated protein complex. By 
comparison to published protein-protein interactions, we selected 121 proteins
for further analysis. PDEF interactors distribute not only in the nucleus, but
also in the cytoplasm, as well as other subcellular compartments. Our data
reveals that PDEF interacts with a variety of proteins involved in cell cycle,
DNA repair, cytoskeleton organization, mRNA processing, tRNA biosynthesis,
protein folding, and cell signaling. Furthermore, the EGFR1- (Erbb1) and Erbb2-
(HER2) related proteins erbin, an ERBB2 interacting protein, catenin delta-1
(which interacts with Erbin), and EGFR (a HER2-homology receptor) were associated
with PDEF. These findings indicate that PDEF may be regulated by Erbb2 or
EGFR-activated signaling pathways in breast cancer cells. Further analysis of
these proteins will identify the roles of PDEF-interacting proteins in breast
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 19203193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cancer Res. 2008 Oct 15;68(20):8499-506. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0907.

MicroRNA-mediated inhibition of prostate-derived Ets factor messenger RNA
translation affects prostate-derived Ets factor regulatory networks in human
breast cancer.

Findlay VJ(1), Turner DP, Moussa O, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Prostate-derived Ets factor (PDEF) is an ETS transcription factor expressed in
normal tissues with high epithelial cell content and noninvasive breast cancer
cells. A putative tumor suppressor PDEF protein expression is often lost during
progression to a more invasive phenotype. Interestingly, PDEF mRNA has been found
to be retained or even overexpressed in the absence of protein; however, the
mechanisms for this remain to be elucidated. This study identifies two microRNAs 
(miRNA) that directly act on and repress PDEF mRNA translation, leading to the
loss of PDEF protein expression and the gain of phenotypes associated with
invasive cells. In addition, we show that these miRNAs are elevated in human
breast tumor samples. Together, these data describe a mechanism of regulation
that explains, for the first time, the lack of correlation between PDEF mRNA and 
protein levels, providing insight into the underexplored role of
posttranscriptional regulation and how this contributes to dysregulated protein
expression in cancer. These observations have critical implications for
therapeutically targeting miRNAs that contribute to cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC2680499
PMID: 18922924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009 Jul;116(2):329-38. doi: 10.1007/s10549-008-0204-1. 
Epub 2008 Oct 10.

A small subgroup of operable breast cancer patients with poor prognosis
identified by quantitative real-time RT-PCR detection of mammaglobin A and
trefoil factor 1 mRNA expression in bone marrow.

Tjensvoll K(1), Gilje B, Oltedal S, Shammas VF, Kvaløy JT, Heikkilä R, Nordgård
O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Biology, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger,
Norway.

PURPOSE: The utility of three different epithelial mRNA markers to detect
clinically significant, disseminated tumour cells in bone marrow (BM) was
explored.
METHODS: Mammaglobin A (hMAM), trefoil factor 1 (TFF-1) and prostate derived Ets 
factor (PDEF) mRNA were quantitated by real-time RT-PCR in BM samples from 192
breast cancer patients undergoing surgery (control group: 26 healthy women).
RESULTS: During a median follow-up of 72 months, four of the five hMAM
BM-positive and three of the seven TFF-1 BM-positive patients experienced a
systemic relapse. Kaplan-Meier survival analyses demonstrated significantly
shorter recurrence-free-, breast-cancer-specific- and overall survival for both
hMAM and TFF-1 BM-positive patients. In contrast, PDEF mRNA quantitation did not 
reveal any significant differences in the survival analyses. Multivariate Cox
regression demonstrated hMAM mRNA BM expression to be an independent predictor of
both overall- (hazard ratio = 5.896), breast-cancer-specific- (hazard ratio =
10.208) and systemic-recurrence-free survival (hazard ratio = 14.304). TFF-1
status was related to hMAM status (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Breast cancer patients with pre-operative elevated BM levels of hMAM 
and/or TFF-1 mRNA seem to constitute a small group of patients with a very poor
prognosis.

PMID: 18846421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Androl. 2008 Nov-Dec;29(6):661-8. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.108.004911. Epub 2008
Jul 31.

Curcumin blocks the activation of androgen and interlukin-6 on prostate-specific 
antigen expression in human prostatic carcinoma cells.

Tsui KH(1), Feng TH, Lin CM, Chang PL, Juang HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University,
Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Curcumin, a naturally occurring compound, exhibits anticancer chemopreventive
effects. We evaluated the effects and mechanisms of curcumin on the gene
expression of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in human androgen-sensitive
prostatic carcinoma cells. LNCaP cells were used to determine the effect of
curcumin on PSA expression. Quantitative PSA expression was assessed by reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA), and immunoblot assay. The modulation of androgen, interlukin-6
(IL-6), and prostate-derived Ets factor (PDEF) on the PSA gene was identified by 
transient gene expression assay with the use of a PSA reporter vector. The effect
of curcumin on the activity of androgen receptors was evaluated by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). Immunoblot assays, RT-PCR, and ELISA
indicated that curcumin treatments blocked the stimulation of methyltrienolone
(R1881) and IL-6 on PSA gene expression in LNCaP cells. The effects of curcumin
appear to be mediated via the androgen response element of PSA gene. Results from
immunoblot assay and EMSA revealed the modulation of curcumin on the expression
of androgen receptor and androgen receptor binding activity on androgen response 
element of PSA gene. Although overexpression of PDEF dramatically enhanced PSA
gene expression, the results of immunoblot assays and transient reporter assays
indicated that curcumin treatments did not affect the gene expression of PDEF.
Curcumin inhibits R1881- and IL-6-mediated PSA gene expression in LNCaP cells
through down-regulation of the expression and activity of androgen receptors.

PMID: 18676361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Sep;19(9):3745-57. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-02-0154. Epub 2008
Jun 25.

Global gene expression analysis identifies PDEF transcriptional networks
regulating cell migration during cancer progression.

Turner DP(1), Findlay VJ, Kirven AD, Moussa O, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Prostate derived ETS factor (PDEF) is an ETS (epithelial-specific E26
transforming sequence) family member that has been identified as a potential
tumor suppressor. In multiple invasive breast cancer cells, PDEF expression
inhibits cell migration by preventing the acquisition of directional
morphological polarity conferred by changes in cytoskeleton organization. In this
study, microarray analysis was used to identify >200 human genes that displayed a
common differential expression pattern in three invasive breast cancer cell lines
after expression of exogenous PDEF protein. Gene ontology associations and data
mining analysis identified focal adhesion, adherens junctions, cell adhesion, and
actin cytoskeleton regulation as cell migration-associated interaction pathways
significantly impacted by PDEF expression. Validation experiments confirmed the
differential expression of four cytoskeleton-associated genes with known
functional associations with these pathways: uPA, uPAR, LASP1, and VASP.
Significantly, chromatin immunoprecipitation studies identified PDEF as a direct 
negative regulator of the metastasis-associated gene uPA and phenotypic rescue
experiments demonstrate that exogenous urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA)
expression can restore the migratory ability of invasive breast cancer cells
expressing PDEF. Furthermore, immunofluorescence studies identify the subcellular
relocalization of urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR), LIM and SH3
protein (LASP1), and vasodilator-stimulated protein (VASP) as a possible
mechanism accounting for the loss of morphological polarity observed upon PDEF
expression.

PMCID: PMC2526691
PMID: 18579687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Int J Cancer. 2008 Sep 15;123(6):1376-84. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23667.

Prostate-derived Ets transcription factor as a favorable prognostic marker in
ovarian cancer patients.

Ghadersohi A(1), Odunsi K, Zhang S, Azrak RG, Bundy BN, Manjili MH, Li F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY 14263, USA. ali.ghadersohi@roswellpark.org

We have previously shown that ovarian tumors express prostate-derived Ets
transcription factor (PDEF). However, the precise role of PDEF in the prognosis
of ovarian cancer is unknown. In our study, we report for the first time that
expression of PDEF in tumor lesions of patients with ovarian cancer is associated
with favorable prognosis. Evaluation of samples from 40 patients with ovarian
cancer showed that early stage (IA) and borderline (IIB, III) ovarian tumors
expressed higher levels of PDEF mRNA and protein and lower levels of survivin
compared to late stage ovarian tumors (IIIC and IV, p < 0.05). Normal ovarian
tissues expressed the highest levels of PDEF mRNA and protein when compared to
tumor tissues (p < 0.05). A Log-Rank test showed that overall survival of
patients with PDEF-positive and survivin-negative ovarian tumors was
significantly longer than those with PDEF-negative and survivin-positive tumors
(p < 0.01). Forced expression of PDEF in PDEF-negative ovarian tumor cells
inhibited tumor cell growth, induced apoptosis, downregulated survivin expression
and its promoter activity. Furthermore, treatment of ovarian cancer cells with
vitamin D or a selenium compound resulted in re-expression of PDEF,
downregulation of survivin, induction of apoptosis and inhibition of tumor cell
growth when compared to untreated controls (p < 0.05). Together, these
observations showed an inverse correlation between PDEF and survivin expression
and suggested that increased PDEF expression along with reduced survivin was
associated with prolonged survival of patients with ovarian cancer.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2827153
PMID: 18567002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Neoplasia. 2007 Oct;9(10):788-96.

Prostate-derived Ets transcription factor overexpression is associated with nodal
metastasis and hormone receptor positivity in invasive breast cancer.

Turcotte S(1), Forget MA, Beauseigle D, Nassif E, Lapointe R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'immuno-oncologie, Institut du cancer de Montréal, Centre de
recherche du CHUM-Hôpital Notre-Dame, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Prostate-derived Ets transcription factor (PDEF) has recently been associated
with invasive breast cancer, but no expression profile has been defined in
clinical specimens. We undertook a comprehensive PDEF transcriptional expression 
study of 86 breast cancer clinical specimens, several cell lines, and normal
tissues. PDEF expression profile was analyzed according to standard
clinicopathologic parameters and compared with hormonal receptor and HER-2/neu
status and to the expression of the new tumor biomarker Dikkopf-1 (DKK1). Wide
ranging PDEF overexpression was observed in 74% of tested tumors, at higher
levels than the average expression found in normal breasts. High PDEF expression 
was associated with hormone receptor positivity (P < .001), moderate to good
differentiation (less than grade III, P = .01), and dissemination to axillary
lymph nodes (P = .002). PDEF was an independent risk factor for nodal involvement
(multivariate analysis, odds ratio 1.250, P = .002). It was expressed in a
different subgroup compared to DKK1-expressing tumors (P < .001). Our data imply 
that PDEF mRNA expression could be useful in breast cancer molecular staging.
Further insights into PDEF functions at the protein level, and possible links
with hormone receptors biology, bear great potential for new therapeutic avenues.

PMCID: PMC2040205
PMID: 17971898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Hum Pathol. 2007 Nov;38(11):1628-38. Epub 2007 May 22.

Expression characteristics of prostate-derived Ets factor support a role in
breast and prostate cancer progression.

Sood AK(1), Saxena R, Groth J, Desouki MM, Cheewakriangkrai C, Rodabaugh KJ,
Kasyapa CS, Geradts J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263,
USA. ashwani.sood@roswellpark.org

The purpose of this study was to understand the characteristics of
prostate-derived Ets factor (PDEF) protein expression in breast and prostate
cancer progression. A polyclonal antibody specific to PDEF was raised and reacted
with tissue microarrays consisting of benign breast, in situ ductal, invasive
ductal, and invasive lobular breast carcinomas. The antibody was also reacted
with tissue microarrays, including benign prostate, prostate intraepithelial
neoplasias (PINs), and prostate carcinomas. Increased expression of PDEF was
identified in 18%, 50%, 46%, and 51% of benign breast tissues, intraductal,
invasive ductal, and invasive lobular carcinomas, respectively. Importantly, in
matched samples of benign breast vs tumor, 90% showed higher expression of PDEF
in the tumor tissue. Moreover, in invasive breast carcinomas, increased PDEF
expression tended to correlate with Her2/neu overexpression. Increased expression
of PDEF was also found in 27%, 33%, and 40% of benign prostate tissues, PIN
samples, and prostate adenocarcinomas, respectively. Again, in matching samples
of cancer vs benign and cancer vs PIN, 68% and 70%, respectively, showed
increased expression in the malignant tissue. Moreover, PDEF was found to be more
highly expressed in tumors with intermediate or high Gleason score compared with 
low-grade tumors (P < .01). In addition, R1881 treatment induced PDEF expression 
in the LNCaP prostate tumor cell line, suggesting regulation of PDEF by androgens
in vivo. Together, these results for the first time show frequent increased
expression of PDEF protein in breast and prostate tumors and support a role for
PDEF in breast and prostate cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC2121591
PMID: 17521701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cancer Res. 2007 May 1;67(9):4219-26.

Reduced PDEF expression increases invasion and expression of mesenchymal genes in
prostate cancer cells.

Gu X(1), Zerbini LF, Otu HH, Bhasin M, Yang Q, Joseph MG, Grall F, Onatunde T,
Correa RG, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)BIDMC Genomics Center, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The epithelium-specific Ets transcription factor, PDEF, plays a role in prostate 
and breast cancer, although its precise function has not been established. In
prostate cancer, PDEF is involved in regulating prostate-specific antigen
expression via interaction with the androgen receptor and NKX3.1, and
down-regulation of PDEF by antiproliferative agents has been associated with
reduced PDEF expression. We now report that reduced expression of PDEF leads to a
morphologic change, increased migration and invasiveness in prostate cancer
cells, reminiscent of transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) function and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Indeed, inhibition of PDEF expression
triggers a transcriptional program of genes involved in the TGFbeta pathway,
migration, invasion, adhesion, and epithelial dedifferentiation. Our results
establish PDEF as a critical regulator of genes involved in cell motility,
invasion, and adhesion of prostate cancer cells.

PMID: 17483333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Clin Invest. 2007 Apr;117(4):978-88. Epub 2007 Mar 8.

SPDEF regulates goblet cell hyperplasia in the airway epithelium.

Park KS(1), Korfhagen TR, Bruno MD, Kitzmiller JA, Wan H, Wert SE, Khurana
Hershey GK, Chen G, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Goblet cell hyperplasia and mucous hypersecretion contribute to the pathogenesis 
of chronic pulmonary diseases including cystic fibrosis, asthma, and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. In the present work, mouse SAM pointed
domain-containing ETS transcription factor (SPDEF) mRNA and protein were detected
in subsets of epithelial cells lining the trachea, bronchi, and tracheal glands. 
SPDEF interacted with the C-terminal domain of thyroid transcription factor 1,
activating transcription of genes expressed selectively in airway epithelial
cells, including Sftpa, Scgb1a1, Foxj1, and Sox17. Expression of Spdef in the
respiratory epithelium of adult transgenic mice caused goblet cell hyperplasia,
inducing both acidic and neutral mucins in vivo, and stainined for both acidic
and neutral mucins in vivo. SPDEF expression was increased at sites of goblet
cell hyperplasia caused by IL-13 and dust mite allergen in a process that was
dependent upon STAT-6. SPDEF was induced following intratracheal allergen
exposure and after Th2 cytokine stimulation and was sufficient to cause goblet
cell differentiation of Clara cells in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1810569
PMID: 17347682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cancer Res. 2007 Feb 15;67(4):1618-25.

Prostate-derived ETS factor is a mediator of metastatic potential through the
inhibition of migration and invasion in breast cancer.

Turner DP(1), Moussa O, Sauane M, Fisher PB, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Cell migration and invasion are critical events during the progression to
metastasis. Without motile function, cancer cells are unable to leave the primary
tumor site, invade through the basement membrane, and form secondary tumors.
Expression of the epithelial-specific ETS factor prostate-derived ETS factor
(PDEF) is reduced in human invasive breast tissue and lost in invasive breast
cancer cell lines. Gain-of-function studies that examine different aspects of
cell migration show that constitutive or inducible PDEF reexpression inhibits
migration and invasion in multiple breast cancer cell lines, and loss-of-function
studies show a stimulation of migration in noninvasive breast cancer cells.
Furthermore, the introduction of PDEF into invasive breast cancer cells led to a 
remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton and altered focal adhesion localization and 
adherence levels. Cells expressing PDEF no longer form the defined morphologic
polarity required for efficient, directional migration. Collectively, these data 
indicate that PDEF down-regulation in invasive breast cancer may promote
actin-mediated cell migration through the extracellular matrix.

PMID: 17308102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2007 Jan;26(1):10-5.

Prostate-derived Ets factor is overexpressed in serous epithelial ovarian tumors.

Rodabaugh KJ(1), Mhawech-Fauceglia P, Groth J, Lele S, Sood AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm and
Carlton Streets, Buffalo, New York, USA.

Erratum in
    Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2007 Apr;26(2):205.

The frequent overexpression of prostate-derived Ets factor (PDEF) mRNA in ovarian
cancer has been previously reported. The aim of this study was to evaluate PDEF
protein expression in ovarian cancer and how this expression might vary at
different stages of epithelial ovarian tumors in comparison to normal ovary. A
new rabbit polyclonal antibody to PDEF was prepared, and immunohistochemistry was
performed on tissue sections from 12 normal ovaries, 10 cases of benign serous
cystadenoma, 17 cases of low malignant potential tumor, 19 cases of stage 1, and 
15 cases of advanced stage primary epithelial (serous) ovarian carcinomas and
their peritoneal metastases. Expression levels were assessed based on the
percentage of positively staining cells and the intensity of staining. All 12
normal ovary and 10 benign serous cystadenoma cases were negative for PDEF
expression. In contrast, 6 of 17 (35%) low malignant potential tumors, 5 of 19
(27%) stage 1, and 5 of 15 (33%) advanced stage ovarian tumors stained positive
for PDEF expression. Together, these results show frequent overexpression of PDEF
protein in epithelial ovarian tumors and its lack of expression in normal ovary
and cystadenomas, and this supports a role for PDEF in ovarian tumorigenesis.
Furthermore, these results suggest that PDEF is a potential marker and target in 
ovarian cancer.

PMID: 17197890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2006 Dec;13(4):1033-67.

Significance, detection and markers of disseminated breast cancer cells.

Lacroix M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Jean-Claude Heuson de Cancérologie Mammaire, Institut Jules
Bordet, Bruxelles, Belgium. itr@iname.com

The development of distant metastases is the major cause of death from breast
cancer. In order to predict and prevent tumour spreading, many attempts are being
made to detect small numbers of tumour cells that have shed from the primary
lesions and have moved to lymph nodes, blood or bone marrow. This article
presents the advantages and the limitations of techniques used for disseminated
tumour cells (DTC) detection. DTC markers are listed and the most currently used 
of them (KRT19, CEACAM5, TACSTD1, MUC1, EGFR, ERBB2, SCGB2A2, SCGB2A1, SCGB1D2,
PIP, SBEM, TFF1, TFF3, ANKRD30A, SPDEF, ESR1, SERPINB5 and GABRP) are discussed, 
notably on the basis of recent data on breast tumour portraits (luminal
epithelial-like, basal/myoepithelial-like and ERBB2). The significance of DTC for
the prognosis and prediction of response to therapy is examined. DTC viability,
the notion of cell dormancy and the concept of breast cancer stem cells are also 
discussed.

PMID: 17158753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2007 Mar;102(1):19-30. Epub 2006 Aug 8.

Prostate-derived Ets transcription factor (PDEF) downregulates survivin
expression and inhibits breast cancer cell growth in vitro and xenograft tumor
formation in vivo.

Ghadersohi A(1), Pan D, Fayazi Z, Hicks DG, Winston JS, Li F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm 
and Carlton Street, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

Previous studies using immunohistochemistry suggest that loss of the expression
of the prostate-derived Ets transcription factor (PDEF) is a strong indicator for
cancer cell malignancy. However, the underlying mechanism for this has not been
well elucidated. We determined the role of PDEF in breast cancer cell growth and 
tumor formation using a series of experiments including Western blotting,
promoter-luciferase reporter assay, RNA interference technology and a mouse
xenograft model. We also determined the relationship between PDEF expression in
human breast tumor specimen and cancer patient survivability. These studies
revealed that PDEF expression is inversely associated with survivin expression
and breast cancer cell xenograft tumor formation. PDEF-specific shRNA-mediated
silencing of PDEF expression resulted in the upregulation of survivin expression 
in MCF-7 cells, which was associated with increased cell growth and resistance to
drug-induced DNA fragmentation (apoptosis). In contrast, survivin-specific
siRNA-mediated silencing of survivin expression decreased MCF-7 cell growth.
Ectopic expression of PDEF inhibited both survivin promoter activity and
endogenous survivin expression. Importantly, shRNA-mediated silencing of PDEF
expression in MCF-7 breast cancer cells enhanced survivin expression and
xenograft tumor formation in vivo. Furthermore, loss of PDEF expression in breast
cancer tissues tends to be associated with unfavorable prognosis. These studies
provide new information for the role of PDEF and survivin in breast cancer cell
growth and tumor formation.

PMCID: PMC2821803
PMID: 16897429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oncogene. 2006 Jun 29;25(28):3994-4008. Epub 2006 Feb 20.

An estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer subset characterized by a hormonally 
regulated transcriptional program and response to androgen.

Doane AS(1), Danso M, Lal P, Donaton M, Zhang L, Hudis C, Gerald WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10021, USA.

Little is known of the underlying biology of estrogen receptor-negative,
progesterone receptor-negative (ER(-)/PR(-)) breast cancer (BC), and few targeted
therapies are available. Clinical heterogeneity of ER(-)/PR(-) tumors suggests
that molecular subsets exist. We performed genome-wide expression analysis of 99 
primary BC samples and eight BC cell lines in an effort to reveal distinct
subsets, provide insight into their biology and potentially identify new
therapeutic targets. We identified a subset of ER(-)/PR(-) tumors with
paradoxical expression of genes known to be either direct targets of ER,
responsive to estrogen, or typically expressed in ER(+) BC. Differentially
expressed genes included SPDEF, FOXA1, XBP1, CYB5, TFF3, NAT1, APOD, ALCAM and AR
(P<0.001). A classification model based on the expression signature of this tumor
class identified molecularly similar BCs in an independent human BC data set and 
among BC cell lines (MDA-MB-453). This cell line demonstrated a proliferative
response to androgen in an androgen receptor-dependent and ER-independent manner.
In addition, the androgen-induced transcriptional program of MDA-MB-453
significantly overlapped the molecular signature of the unique ER(-)/PR(-)
subclass of human tumors. This subset of BCs, characterized by a hormonally
regulated transcriptional program and response to androgen, suggests the
potential for therapeutic strategies targeting the androgen signaling pathway.

PMID: 16491124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 15;65(24):11572-80.

Novel role for PDEF in epithelial cell migration and invasion.

Gunawardane RN(1), Sgroi DC, Wrobel CN, Koh E, Daley GQ, Brugge JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Cell migration and invasion are two critical cellular processes that are often
deregulated during tumorigenesis. To identify factors that contribute to
oncogenic progression by stimulating cell migration, we conducted a powerful
retroviral based migration screen using an MCF7 cDNA library and the immortalized
human breast epithelial cell line MCF-10A. We identified prostate derived Ets
factor (PDEF), an Ets transcription factor that is overexpressed in both prostate
and breast carcinoma, as a candidate promigratory gene from this screen. Whereas 
PDEF induced limited motility of MCF-10A cells, coexpression of PDEF with the
receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) ErbB2 and colony-stimulating factor receptor
(CSF-1R)/CSF-1 significantly enhanced MCF-10A motility. Furthermore, cells
coexpressing PDEF with either ErbB2 or CSF-1R/CSF-1 induced a dramatic invasive
phenotype in three-dimensional cultures. Constitutive activation of the
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway also enhanced PDEF-induced
motility and invasion, suggesting that activation of the ERK/mitogen-activated
protein kinase by ErbB2 and CSF-1R/CSF-1 can cooperate with PDEF to promote
motility and invasion. Furthermore, PDEF promoted anchorage-independent growth of
ErbB2 and CSF-1R/CSF-1-expressing cells. Using laser capture microdissection, we 
also found that PDEF mRNA is overexpressed in breast tumor epithelia throughout
tumor progression. Taken together, these findings suggest that the transcription 
factor PDEF may play an important role in breast tumorigenesis and that PDEF
overexpression may be particularly significant in tumors that exhibit activation 
of oncogenic RTKs such as ErbB2 and CSF-1R.

PMCID: PMC2919290
PMID: 16357167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Jan 1;97(1):1-17.

RUNX1 (AML-1) and RUNX2 (AML-3) cooperate with prostate-derived Ets factor to
activate transcription from the PSA upstream regulatory region.

Fowler M(1), Borazanci E, McGhee L, Pylant SW, Williams BJ, Glass J, Davis JN,
Meyers S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, 1501 Kings Highway, Shreveport, LA 711130, USA.

The RUNX transcription factors (RUNX1, RUNX2, and RUNX3) play essential roles in 
hematopoiesis and skeletal development. Consistent with these roles in
differentiation and cell cycle, the activity of both RUNX1 and RUNX3 is perturbed
in cancer. To determine a role for the RUNX factors in prostate biology, we
investigated the expression of RUNX factors in prostate epithelial cell lines and
normal prostate tissue. RUNX1, RUNX2, and RUNX3 were expressed in both normal
prostate tissue and an immortalized, non-transformed cell line. We found that
prostate cancer-derived cell lines expressed RUNX1 and RUNX2, but not RUNX3.
Next, we sought to identify prostate-specific genes whose expression could be
regulated by RUNX proteins. Four consensus RUNX sites are located within the
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) regulatory region. Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
(ChIP) analysis showed that RUNX1 is specifically bound to the PSA regulatory
region in LNCaP cells. RUNX1 and RUNX2 activated the PSA regulatory region alone 
or cooperatively with prostate-derived ETS factor (PDEF) and RUNX1 physically
associated with PDEF. Taken together, our results suggest that RUNX factors
participate in prostate epithelial cell function and cooperate with an Ets
transcription factor to regulate PSA gene expression.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16237704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Biochemistry. 2005 May 17;44(19):7095-106.

Analysis of the 2.0 A crystal structure of the protein-DNA complex of the human
PDEF Ets domain bound to the prostate specific antigen regulatory site.

Wang Y(1), Feng L, Said M, Balderman S, Fayazi Z, Liu Y, Ghosh D, Gulick AM.

Author information: 
(1)Hauptman Woodward Medical Institute, 73 High Street, Buffalo, New York 14203, 
USA. yangzhou.wang@hp.com

PDEF, a prostate epithelial specific transcription factor, is a member of the Ets
family of DNA binding proteins. Here we report a 2.0 A crystal structure of the
PDEF Ets domain in complex with a natural, high-affinity DNA binding site in the 
promoter/enhancer region of the human prostate specific antigen gene. Comparison 
of the PDEF-DNA complex with other Ets complexes revealed key features that are
shared among Ets members, as well as important differences in substrate
specification at both the "GGA" core and the flanking regions of the DNA site.
The combination of the serine residue at position 308 and the glutamine at
position 311 explains the previous observation that the PDEF binds preferentially
to a thymine at the +4 position of its binding site. Despite the common essential
features that are shared among Ets members, PDEF demonstrates distinct patterns
of interactions at different positions of DNA in achieving sequence specific
recognition. Collectively, the common and unique interactions with both the DNA
bases and the backbone phosphates lead to substrate specificity and individual
preference for certain DNA sites.

PMID: 15882048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Dec;5(2):285-9.

Developmental expression pattern of D-ets4, the Drosophila homologue of human
Pdef.

Hsouna A(1), Watson DK, Hsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Primordial germ cells (PGCs) are the first cells specified in many organisms. In 
Drosophila, as in mammals, PGCs are formed at the posterior end outside of the
embryonic proper. They are brought into the gut during gastrulation and then
actively migrate through the gut epithelium into the mesoderm. They attach to the
future gonadal mesoderm and coalesce, forming the gonads. Control of this
migratory process is not yet completely understood. D-ets4 and its mammalian
homologue Pdef are members of the evolutionarily conserved Ets family of
transcription factors. Pdef has been shown to down-regulate the invasive and
migratory potential of breast tumors. Our results show that the Drosophila D-ets4
protein is specifically expressed in PGCs before the onset of migration and is
lost in the migratory and post-migratory PGCs. We also show that D-ets4 is not
involved in other migratory events such as border cell migration during
oogenesis. It is, however, expressed strongly in the pre-stage 10 oocyte nuclei
and modestly in larval tissues such as imaginal discs and salivary glands, but
not in the brain.

PMID: 15567727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Jan 1;94(1):168-77.

Structural and functional analysis of domains mediating interaction between
NKX-3.1 and PDEF.

Chen H(1), Bieberich CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County,
Baltimore, Maryland 21250, USA.

NKX-3.1 is a suspected prostate tumor suppressor gene that encodes a homeodomain 
transcription factor. NKX-3.1 has been demonstrated to interact with prostate
derived Ets factor (PDEF) and to suppress the ability of PDEF to transactivate
the prostate specific antigen promoter. To dissect the molecular basis of the
interaction between these transcription factors, deletion analyses were preformed
using the yeast two-hybrid system. The interaction of NKX-3.1 with full-length
PDEF requires part of the homeodomain and a tyrosine-rich 21 amino acid sequence 
that lies C-terminal to the homeodomain. The interaction of PDEF with full-length
NKX-3.1 requires the Ets domain and a linker region that lies between the Ets and
pointed domains. Deletion of the C-terminal 21 amino acids of NKX-3.1 completely 
disrupts the ability to suppress the transactivation function of PDEF in prostate
tumor cells, demonstrating concordance between interaction in yeast and function 
in mammalian cells. These studies have identified novel protein-protein
interaction domains within NKX-3.1 and PDEF that operate in concert with their
respective DNA binding domains to mediate functional interactions between these
growth regulatory transcription factors.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15523673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Mol Diagn. 2004 May;6(2):90-5.

Identification of MGB1 as a marker in the differential diagnosis of lung tumors
in patients with a history of breast cancer by analysis of publicly available
SAGE data.

Koga T(1), Horio Y, Mitsudomi T, Takahashi T, Yatabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Diagnostics, Aichi Cancer Center
Research Institute, Nagoya, Japan.

Comment in
    J Mol Diagn. 2006 Jul;8(3):390-1; author reply 391-3.

The risk of developing second primary cancers is increased in patients with
breast cancer. The lung is one of the major target organs, and therefore a
differential diagnosis between primary and metastatic cancers is required for the
treatment of lung tumors in patients with a history of breast cancer. However,
biopsy specimens frequently result in small, fragmented tissues containing only a
few, degenerated cancer cells. We attempted to find a useful marker for
differential diagnosis, using the online SAGE database. We selected three
molecules, small breast epithelial mucin (SBEM), prostate epithelium-specific Ets
transcription factor (PDEF), and mammaglobin (MGB1), as potential markers for
breast cancer. SBEM and PDEF proved of no use for practical differential
diagnosis because they are expressed in the normal bronchus. In contrast,
expression of MGB1 was detected in all 22 primary breast cancers, but not in 22
normal lung tissues. Furthermore, all 12 metastatic breast cancers examined
demonstrated positive MGB1 transcripts, whereas one of 48 primary lung
adenocarcinomas expressed MGB1. This suggests that MGB1 can serve as a
differential molecular marker. In practice, prospective examination, using the
nine cases with a history of breast cancer, confirmed the usefulness of MGB1 in
differential diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC1867472
PMID: 15096563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Oncol Rep. 2004 Feb;11(2):453-8.

Prostate derived Ets transcription factor shows better tumor-association than
other cancer-associated molecules.

Ghadersohi A(1), Odunsi K, Lele S, Collins Y, Greco WR, Winston J, Liang P, Sood 
AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263,
USA.

We previously reported that prostate derived Ets transcription factor (PDEF) is a
breast tumor-associated molecule. To obtain further insights into PDEF expression
in other human tumor types, a cDNA library database from human adult normal and
tumor tissues was compiled and searched for PDEF distribution. The results showed
that PDEF is present at relative higher frequencies in the cDNA libraries from
brain, breast, lung and ovarian tumors in comparison to those from the
corresponding normal tissues. RT/PCR analysis of PDEF expression in ovarian
tumors confirmed that PDEF is expressed in 36 out of 51 (71%) ovarian tumors.
Further comparison of the distribution of PDEF with other widely recognized
cancer-associated molecules showed that PDEF has more restricted distributions
than Her-2/neu, Bcl-2, survivin or telomerase in cDNA libraries from normal human
tissues and more increased distribution than Her-2/neu, CA-125, Bcl-2, survivin
and telomerase in cDNA libraries from brain (except survivin), breast, lung and
ovarian tumors. These data together show a better tumor-association for PDEF and 
suggest that PDEF is a more suitable target for developing specific cancer
therapies.

PMID: 14719083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Int J Oncol. 2004 Jan;24(1):25-31.

Expressional changes after histone deacetylase inhibition by valproic acid in
LNCaP human prostate cancer cells.

Thelen P(1), Schweyer S, Hemmerlein B, Wuttke W, Seseke F, Ringert RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Georg-August-University, D-37075 Göttingen, Germany.
pthelen@gwdg.de

Pathogenesis of prostate cancer is paralleled by aberrant transcriptional
regulation which involves gene silencing by histone deacetylases. In cancer
cells, inhibitors of histone deacetylases such as valproic acid can act as
differentiation agents which relieve pro-apoptotic factors from transcriptional
repression. We investigated the potential of the well-tolerated anticonvulsant
valproic acid in prostate cancer cell line LNCaP and analyzed the activation of
pro-apoptotic factors and resulting apoptosis. We used real time RT-PCR to
quantify the mRNA expression of prostate-specific antigen, prostate-derived Ets
transcription factor, tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-3 and
insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3. An automated sandwich-ELISA was
used to measure secretion of prostate-specific antigen in conditioned cell
culture media of LNCaP prostate cancer cells. Apoptotic cells were detected
cytochemically and by applying immunocytochemistry. Activity of histone
deacetylases in nuclear extracts was measured with a colorimetric assay kit.
Valproic acid treatment caused a marked inhibition of histone deacetylases
activity. Expression of prostate-derived Ets transcription factor and
consequently prostate-specific antigen were down-regulated to basal levels in
LNCaP cells. Pro-apoptotic factor caspase-3, tissue inhibitor of matrix
metalloproteinase-3 and insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 were
up-regulated resulting in apoptosis of tumor cells. Valproic acid mediates marked
effects on the expression of genes relevant in proliferation and apoptosis. Our
study provides strong evidence that prostate cancer may benefit particularly from
anti-proliferative stimuli from this well established drug.

PMID: 14654937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cancer Res. 2003 Aug 1;63(15):4626-31.

Pdef expression in human breast cancer is correlated with invasive potential and 
altered gene expression.

Feldman RJ(1), Sementchenko VI, Gayed M, Fraig MM, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Ets transcription factors control multiple biological processes, including cell
proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, angiogenesis, transformation, and
invasion. Pdef is an Ets transcription factor originally identified in prostate
tissue. We demonstrate that human Pdef is expressed at high levels primarily in
tissues with high epithelial cell content, including prostate, colon, and breast.
We also determined that Pdef protein is reduced in human invasive breast cancer
and is absent in invasive breast cancer cell lines. We next assessed the
functional consequences of these observations. Significantly, expression of Pdef 
in breast cancer cells leads to inhibition of invasion, migration, and growth.
Expression of Pdef also results in the down-regulation of urokinase-type
plasminogen activator and activation of the promoter of the tumor suppressor
gene, MASPIN: Growth-suppressive effects of Pdef expression are mediated in part 
by a G(0)-G(1) cell cycle arrest associated with elevated p21 levels.
Collectively, these results indicate that Pdef loss may alter the expression of
genes controlling progression to invasive breast cancer.

PMID: 12907642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Oncogene. 2003 Apr 17;22(15):2322-33.

p62 overexpression in breast tumors and regulation by prostate-derived Ets factor
in breast cancer cells.

Thompson HG(1), Harris JW, Wold BJ, Lin F, Brody JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California, CA 92697-2715,
USA.

p62 is a multifunctional cytoplasmic protein able to noncovalently bind ubiquitin
and several signaling proteins, suggesting a regulatory role connected to the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. No studies to date have linked p62 protein
expression with pathological states. Here we demonstrate the overabundance of p62
protein in malignant breast tissue relative to normal breast tissue. The
proteasome inhibitor PSI increased p62 mRNA and protein; however, PSI treatment
of breast epithelial cells transfected with the p62 promoter did not affect
promoter activity. High levels of prostate-derived Ets factor (PDEF) mRNA have
been identified in breast cancer compared to normal breast. Only the PSA and
maspin promoters have been identified as targets of this transcription factor.
Here we show that PDEF stimulates the p62 promoter through at least two sites,
and likely acts as a coactivator. PSI treatment abrogates the PDEF-stimulated
increase of p62 promoter activity by 50%. Thus, multiple mechanisms for the
induction of p62 exist. We conclude that (1) p62 protein is overexpressed in
breast cancer; (2) p62 mRNA and protein increase in response to PSI, with no
change of basal promoter activity; (3) PDEF upregulates p62 promoter activity
through at least two sites; and (4) PSI downregulates PDEF-induced p62 promoter
activation through one of these sites.

PMID: 12700667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Cancer Res. 2002 Jan 15;62(2):338-40.

NKX-3.1 interacts with prostate-derived Ets factor and regulates the activity of 
the PSA promoter.

Chen H(1), Nandi AK, Li X, Bieberich CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland, Baltimore County,
Baltimore, Maryland 21250, USA.

The NKX-3.1 homeobox gene maps to human chromosome 8p21, a region that undergoes 
frequent loss of heterozygosity in prostate tumors. Loss of Nkx-3.1 function in
mice leads to epithelial overgrowth. To further elucidate the molecular basis of 
NKX-3.1 function, a genetic screen for proteins that interact with NKX-3.1 was
performed. Prostate-derived Ets factor (PDEF) was identified as a potential
partner of NKX-3.1. Coimmunoprecipitation analyses demonstrated that NKX-3.1 and 
PDEF are physically associated in prostate epithelial cells. Cotransfection
analyses demonstrated that NKX-3.1 can abolish the transcriptional activation
function of PDEF on the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) promoter. These data
identify PSA as a target gene for NKX-3.1 and provide new insights into the
function of this candidate tumor suppressor.

PMID: 11809674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Clin Cancer Res. 2001 Sep;7(9):2731-8.

Prostate epithelium-derived Ets transcription factor mRNA is overexpressed in
human breast tumors and is a candidate breast tumor marker and a breast tumor
antigen.

Ghadersohi A(1), Sood AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York
14263, USA.

PURPOSE: There is a need to identify novel breast tumor-associated molecules with
a potential as diagnostic/prognostic markers of breast cancer as well as targets 
of vaccine and drug discovery against this cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used a combination of digital differential display and
reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) methods to identify breast tumor-associated
cDNAs.
RESULTS: It was found that prostate epithelium-derived Ets transcription factor
(PDEF) and five other cDNAs occur at high frequency in the cDNA libraries from
normal human breast tissue and human breast tumors. In contrast, these cDNAs are 
either undetectable or present at low frequencies in the cDNA libraries from
other normal human tissues. RT-PCR expression analysis of PDEF showed it to be
overexpressed in 14 of 20 primary human breast tumors and in one metastases
tested. Also, consistent with the digital differential display data, RT-PCR
analysis of PDEF expression showed highly restricted expression in normal human
tissues. Furthermore, we show that PDEF transcript levels are 192-fold higher in 
the peripheral blood of a breast cancer patient in comparison with two normal
individuals and another breast cancer patient. In contrast to PDEF, RT-PCR
analysis of the expression of the other three cDNAs, including MYL5, Hs.44017,
and Hs.215937, showed that these cDNAs are expressed in several normal human
tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that PDEF is a breast tumor-associated cDNA
and should be further evaluated for its potential as a breast tumor marker and a 
breast tumor antigen.

PMID: 11555586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 14;275(2):1216-25.

PDEF, a novel prostate epithelium-specific ets transcription factor, interacts
with the androgen receptor and activates prostate-specific antigen gene
expression.

Oettgen P(1), Finger E, Sun Z, Akbarali Y, Thamrongsak U, Boltax J, Grall F, Dube
A, Weiss A, Brown L, Quinn G, Kas K, Endress G, Kunsch C, Libermann TA.

Author information: 
(1)New England Baptist Bone and Joint Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Prostate cancer, the most frequent solid cancer in older men, is a leading cause 
of cancer deaths. Although proliferation and differentiation of normal prostate
epithelia and the initial growth of prostate cancer cells are androgen-dependent,
prostate cancers ultimately become androgen-independent and refractory to hormone
therapy. The prostate-specific antigen (PSA) gene has been widely used as a
diagnostic indicator for androgen-dependent and -independent prostate cancer.
Androgen-induced and prostate epithelium-specific PSA expression is regulated by 
a proximal promoter and an upstream enhancer via several androgen receptor
binding sites. However, little progress has been made in identifying
androgen-independent regulatory elements involved in PSA gene regulation. We
report the isolation of a novel, prostate epithelium-specific Ets transcription
factor, PDEF (prostate-derived Ets factor), that among the Ets family uniquely
prefers binding to a GGAT rather than a GGAA core. PDEF acts as an
androgen-independent transcriptional activator of the PSA promoter. PDEF also
directly interacts with the DNA binding domain of androgen receptor and enhances 
androgen-mediated activation of the PSA promoter. Our results, as well as the
critical roles of other Ets factors in cellular differentiation and
tumorigenesis, strongly suggest that PDEF is an important regulator of prostate
gland and/or prostate cancer development.

PMID: 10625666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


