
1. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Sep 15;7(10):7182-90. eCollection 2014.

miR-199a-5p regulates the expression of metastasis-associated genes in B16F10
melanoma cells.

Zhou J(1), Liu R(1), Wang Y(1), Tang J(2), Tang S(3), Chen X(4), Xia K(5), Xiong 
W(6), Xu D(1), Wang S(1), He Q(1), Cao K(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Third Xiangya Hospital,
Central South University Changsha, China. (2)Institute of Medical Physics and
Engineering, Department of Engineering Physics, Tsinghua University Beijing,
China. (3)Cleft Lip and Palate Treatment Center, Second Affiliated Hospital,
Shantou University Medical College Shantou, China. (4)Department of Dermatology, 
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University Changsha, China. (5)State Key
Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Central South University Changsha, China.
(6)Cancer Research Institute, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis of Ministry of
Health, Central South University Changsha, China. (7)Department of Oncology,
Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University Changsha, China.

MicroRNAs are regulatory factors that play important roles in tumor development, 
invasion and metastasis. Previously, we showed that miR-199a is abnormally
expressed in clinical melanoma specimens and expression was closely associated
with clinical features of metastasis. However, the exact molecular mechanisms by 
which miR-199a-5p influences melanoma invasion and metastasis remains unclear. In
this study, we investigated gene expression changes of metastasis-associated
genes in B16F10 melanoma cells following targeted silencing or overexpression of 
miR-199a-5p, using mouse tumor metastasis PCR arrays. Comparison of gene
expression changes in miR-199a-5p-silenced versus overexpressing cells identified
a set of upregulated genes (> 2-fold) including Cd44, Cdh1, Cxcr4, Etv4, Fxyd5,
Rpsa, Mmp3, Myc, Rb1, Tcf20, Hprt1, Actb1 and downregulated genes (> 2-fold)
including Ctsk, Itga7 and Tnfsf10. Regulation of a subset of these genes (Myc,
Tnfsf10 and Cd44) following miR-199a-5p silencing or overexpression was validated
by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western blot. In 
conclusion, our study demonstrates that miR-199a-5p regulates melanoma
metastasis-related genes, and may provide a basis for the development of novel,
molecularly targeted drugs.

PMCID: PMC4230055
PMID: 25400815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Med Genet. 2014 Nov;51(11):737-47. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102582. Epub
2014 Sep 16.

De novo and rare inherited mutations implicate the transcriptional coregulator
TCF20/SPBP in autism spectrum disorder.

Babbs C(1), Lloyd D(2), Pagnamenta AT(3), Twigg SR(2), Green J(2), McGowan SJ(2),
Mirza G(4), Naples R(2), Sharma VP(5), Volpi EV(4), Buckle VJ(2), Wall SA(6),
Knight SJ(3); International Molecular Genetic Study of Autism Consortium
(IMGSAC), Parr JR(7), Wilkie AO(8).

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford,
UK NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, UK. (2)Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK. (3)NIHR Biomedical
Research Centre, Oxford, UK Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University 
of Oxford, Oxford, UK. (4)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK. (5)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Oxford, UK Craniofacial Unit, Department of Plastic and Reconstructive 
Surgery, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, 
UK. (6)Craniofacial Unit, Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery,
Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(7)Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.
(8)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford,
UK NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, UK Craniofacial Unit, Department of
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are common and have a strong genetic
basis, yet the cause of ~70-80% ASDs remains unknown. By clinical cytogenetic
testing, we identified a family in which two brothers had ASD, mild intellectual 
disability and a chromosome 22 pericentric inversion, not detected in either
parent, indicating de novo mutation with parental germinal mosaicism. We
hypothesised that the rearrangement was causative of their ASD and localised the 
chromosome 22 breakpoints.
METHODS: The rearrangement was characterised using fluorescence in situ
hybridisation, Southern blotting, inverse PCR and dideoxy-sequencing. Open
reading frames and intron/exon boundaries of the two physically disrupted genes
identified, TCF20 and TNRC6B, were sequenced in 342 families (260 multiplex and
82 simplex) ascertained by the International Molecular Genetic Study of Autism
Consortium (IMGSAC).
RESULTS: IMGSAC family screening identified a de novo missense mutation of TCF20 
in a single case and significant association of a different missense mutation of 
TCF20 with ASD in three further families. Through exome sequencing in another
project, we independently identified a de novo frameshifting mutation of TCF20 in
a woman with ASD and moderate intellectual disability. We did not identify a
significant association of TNRC6B mutations with ASD.
CONCLUSIONS: TCF20 encodes a transcriptional coregulator (also termed SPBP) that 
is structurally and functionally related to RAI1, the critical dosage-sensitive
protein implicated in the behavioural phenotypes of the Smith-Magenis and
Potocki-Lupski 17p11.2 deletion/duplication syndromes, in which ASD is frequently
diagnosed. This study provides the first evidence that mutations in TCF20 are
also associated with ASD.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4215269
PMID: 25228304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 4;9(4):e93891. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093891. eCollection 
2014.

Large-scale RNA interference screening in mammalian cells identifies novel
regulators of mutant huntingtin aggregation.

Yamanaka T(1), Wong HK(2), Tosaki A(3), Bauer PO(3), Wada K(3), Kurosawa M(1),
Shimogori T(4), Hattori N(5), Nukina N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience for Neurodegenerative Disorders, Juntendo
University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Laboratory for Structural
Neuropathology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama, Japan; Laboratory for
Molecular Mechanisms of Thalamus Development, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Saitama, Japan; CREST (Core Research for Evolutionary Science and Technology),
JST, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Laboratory for Structural Neuropathology, RIKEN Brain
Science Institute, Saitama, Japan; Center for Neurologic Diseases, Department of 
Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Harvard
Institutes of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Laboratory for Structural Neuropathology, RIKEN Brain Science Institute,
Saitama, Japan. (4)Laboratory for Molecular Mechanisms of Thalamus Development,
RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama, Japan. (5)Department of Neurology,
Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

In polyglutamine (polyQ) diseases including Huntington's disease (HD), mutant
proteins containing expanded polyQ stretch form aggregates in neurons. Genetic or
RNAi screenings in yeast, C. elegans or Drosophila have identified multiple genes
modifying polyQ aggregation, a few of which are confirmed effective in mammals.
However, the overall molecular mechanism underlying polyQ protein aggregation in 
mammalian cells still remains obscure. We here perform RNAi screening in mouse
neuro2a cells to identify mammalian modifiers for aggregation of mutant
huntingtin, a causative protein of HD. By systematic cell transfection and
automated cell image analysis, we screen ~ 12000 shRNA clones and identify 111
shRNAs that either suppress or enhance mutant huntingtin aggregation, without
altering its gene expression. Classification of the shRNA-targets suggests that
genes with various cellular functions such as gene transcription and protein
phosphorylation are involved in modifying the aggregation. Subsequent analysis
suggests that, in addition to the aggregation-modifiers sensitive to proteasome
inhibition, some of them, such as a transcription factor Tcf20, and kinases
Csnk1d and Pik3c2a, are insensitive to it. As for Tcf20, which contains polyQ
stretches at N-terminus, its binding to mutant huntingtin aggregates is observed 
in neuro2a cells and in HD model mouse neurons. Notably, except Pik3c2a, the rest
of the modifiers identified here are novel. Thus, our first large-scale RNAi
screening in mammalian system identifies previously undescribed genetic players
that regulate mutant huntingtin aggregation by several, possibly
mammalian-specific mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3976342
PMID: 24705917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 9;9(1):e85262. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085262. eCollection 
2014.

SPBP is a sulforaphane induced transcriptional coactivator of NRF2 regulating
expression of the autophagy receptor p62/SQSTM1.

Darvekar SR(1), Elvenes J(1), Brenne HB(1), Johansen T(1), Sjøttem E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cancer Research Group, Department of Medical Biology, University of 
Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway.

Organisms exposed to oxidative stress respond by orchestrating a stress response 
to prevent further damage. Intracellular levels of antioxidant agents increase,
and damaged components are removed by autophagy induction. The KEAP1-NRF2
signaling pathway is the main pathway responsible for cell defense against
oxidative stress and for maintaining the cellular redox balance at physiological 
levels. Sulforaphane, an isothiocyanate derived from cruciferous vegetables, is a
potent inducer of KEAP1-NRF2 signaling and antioxidant response element driven
gene expression. In this study, we show that sulforaphane enhances the expression
of the transcriptional coregulator SPBP. The expression curve peaks 6-8 hours
post stimulation, and parallels the sulforaphane-induced expression of NRF2 and
the autophagy receptor protein p62/SQSTM1. Reporter gene assays show that SPBP
stimulates the expression of p62/SQSTM1 via ARE elements in the promoter region, 
and siRNA mediated knock down of SPBP significantly decreases the expression of
p62/SQSTM1 and the formation of p62/SQSTM1 bodies in HeLa cells. Furthermore,
SPBP siRNA reduces the sulforaphane induced expression of NRF2, and the
expression of the autophagy marker protein LC3B. Both these proteins contain
ARE-like elements in their promoter regions. Over-expressed SPBP and NRF2 acts
synergistically on the p62/SQSTM1 promoter and colocalize in nuclear speckles in 
HeLa cells. Collectively, these results suggest that SPBP is a coactivator of
NRF2, and hence may be important for securing enhanced and sustained expression
of NRF2 induced genes such as proteins involved in selective autophagy.

PMCID: PMC3887019
PMID: 24416372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 18;8(10):e78907. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078907.
eCollection 2013.

A phylogenetic study of SPBP and RAI1: evolutionary conservation of chromatin
binding modules.

Darvekar S(1), Rekdal C, Johansen T, Sjøttem E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cancer Research Group, Department of Medical Biology, University of 
Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway.

Our genome is assembled into and array of highly dynamic nucleosome structures
allowing spatial and temporal access to DNA. The nucleosomes are subject to a
wide array of post-translational modifications, altering the DNA-histone
interaction and serving as docking sites for proteins exhibiting effector or
"reader" modules. The nuclear proteins SPBP and RAI1 are composed of several
putative "reader" modules which may have ability to recognise a set of histone
modification marks. Here we have performed a phylogenetic study of their putative
reader modules, the C-terminal ePHD/ADD like domain, a novel nucleosome binding
region and an AT-hook motif. Interactions studies in vitro and in yeast cells
suggested that despite the extraordinary long loop region in their ePHD/ADD-like 
chromatin binding domains, the C-terminal region of both proteins seem to adopt a
cross-braced topology of zinc finger interactions similar to other structurally
determined ePHD/ADD structures. Both their ePHD/ADD-like domain and their novel
nucleosome binding domain are highly conserved in vertebrate evolution, and
construction of a phylogenetic tree displayed two well supported clusters
representing SPBP and RAI1, respectively. Their genome and domain organisation
suggest that SPBP and RAI1 have occurred from a gene duplication event. The
phylogenetic tree suggests that this duplication has happened early in vertebrate
evolution, since only one gene was identified in insects and lancelet. Finally,
experimental data confirm that the conserved novel nucleosome binding region of
RAI1 has the ability to bind the nucleosome core and histones. However, an
adjacent conserved AT-hook motif as identified in SPBP is not present in RAI1,
and deletion of the novel nucleosome binding region of RAI1 did not significantly
affect its nuclear localisation.

PMCID: PMC3799622
PMID: 24205348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Toxicol Sci. 2013 Nov;136(1):107-19. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kft191. Epub 2013 Aug
31.

Genome-wide RNAi high-throughput screen identifies proteins necessary for the
AHR-dependent induction of CYP1A1 by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Solaimani P(1), Damoiseaux R, Hankinson O.

Author information: 
(1)* Molecular Toxicology Interdepartmental Program, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, and the Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center and.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) has a plethora of physiological roles, and
upon dysregulation, carcinogenesis can occur. One target gene of AHR encodes the 
xenobiotic and drug-metabolizing enzyme CYP1A1, which is inducible by the
environmental contaminant 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) via the AHR.
An siRNA library targeted against over 5600 gene candidates in the druggable
genome was used to transfect mouse Hepa-1 cells, which were then treated with
TCDD, and subsequently assayed for CYP1A1-dependent ethoxyresorufin-o-deethylase 
(EROD) activity. Following redundant siRNA activity (RSA) statistical analysis,
we identified 93 hits that reduced EROD activity with a p value = .005 and
substantiated 39 of these as positive hits in a secondary screening using
endoribonuclease-prepared siRNAs (esiRNAs). Twelve of the corresponding gene
products were subsequently confirmed to be necessary for the induction of CYP1A1 
messenger RNA by TCDD. None of the candidates were deficient in aryl hydrocarbon 
nuclear translocator expression. However 6 gene products including UBE2i, RAB40C,
CRYGD, DCTN4, RBM5, and RAD50 are required for the expression of AHR as well as
for induction of CYP1A1. We also found 2 gene products, ARMC8 and TCF20, to be
required for the induction of CYP1A1, but our data are ambiguous as to whether
they are required for the expression of AHR. In contrast, SIN3A, PDC, TMEM5, and 
CD9 are not required for AHR expression but are required for the induction of
CYP1A1, implicating a direct role in Cyp1a1 transcription. Our methods, although 
applied to Cyp1a1, could be modified for identifying proteins that regulate other
inducible genes.

PMCID: PMC3829574
PMID: 23997114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(6):e1002751. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002751. Epub 2012 Jun
14.

Crystal structures reveal the multi-ligand binding mechanism of Staphylococcus
aureus ClfB.

Xiang H(1), Feng Y, Wang J, Liu B, Chen Y, Liu L, Deng X, Yang M.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Protein Sciences of Ministry of Education, Tsinghua-Peking 
Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 
China.

Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) pathogenesis is a complex process involving a
diverse array of extracellular and cell wall components. ClfB, an MSCRAMM
(Microbial Surface Components Recognizing Adhesive Matrix Molecules) family
surface protein, described as a fibrinogen-binding clumping factor, is a key
determinant of S. aureus nasal colonization, but the molecular basis for
ClfB-ligand recognition remains unknown. In this study, we solved the crystal
structures of apo-ClfB and its complexes with fibrinogen a (Fg a) and cytokeratin
10 (CK10) peptides. Structural comparison revealed a conserved
glycine-serine-rich (GSR) ClfB binding motif (GSSGXGXXG) within the ligands,
which was also found in other human proteins such as Engrailed protein, TCF20 and
Dermokine proteins. Interaction between Dermokine and ClfB was confirmed by
subsequent binding assays. The crystal structure of ClfB complexed with a
15-residue peptide derived from Dermokine revealed the same peptide binding mode 
of ClfB as identified in the crystal structures of ClfB-Fg a and ClfB-CK10. The
results presented here highlight the multi-ligand binding property of ClfB, which
is very distinct from other characterized MSCRAMMs to-date. The adherence of
multiple peptides carrying the GSR motif into the same pocket in ClfB is
reminiscent of MHC molecules. Our results provide a template for the
identification of other molecules targeted by S. aureus during its colonization
and infection. We propose that other MSCRAMMs like ClfA and SdrG also possess
multi-ligand binding properties.

PMCID: PMC3375286
PMID: 22719251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biochem J. 2012 Feb 15;442(1):65-75. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111230.

Identification of two independent nucleosome-binding domains in the
transcriptional co-activator SPBP.

Darvekar S(1), Johnsen SS, Eriksen AB, Johansen T, Sjøttem E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cancer Research Group, Department of Medical Biology, University of 
Tromsø, 9037 Tromsø, Norway.

Transcriptional regulation requires co-ordinated action of transcription factors,
co-activator complexes and general transcription factors to access specific loci 
in the dense chromatin structure. In the present study we demonstrate that the
transcriptional co-regulator SPBP [stromelysin-1 PDGF (platelet-derived growth
factor)-responsive element binding protein] contains two independent
chromatin-binding domains, the SPBP-(1551-1666) region and the C-terminal
extended PHD [ePHD/ADD (extended plant homeodomain/ATRX-DNMT3-DNMT3L)] domain.
The region 1551-1666 is a novel core nucleosome-interaction domain located
adjacent to the AT-hook motif in the DNA-binding domain. This novel
nucleosome-binding region is critically important for proper localization of SPBP
in the cell nucleus. The ePHD/ADD domain associates with nucleosomes in a histone
tail-dependent manner, and has significant impact on the dynamic interaction
between SPBP and chromatin. Furthermore, SPBP and its homologue RAI1
(retinoic-acid-inducible protein 1), are strongly enriched on chromatin in
interphase HeLa cells, and both proteins display low nuclear mobility. RAI1
contains a region with homology to the novel nucleosome-binding region
SPBP-(1551-1666) and an ePHD/ADD domain with ability to bind nucleosomes. These
results indicate that the transcriptional co-regulator SPBP and its homologue
RAI1 implicated in Smith-Magenis syndrome and Potocki-Lupski syndrome both belong
to the expanding family of chromatin-binding proteins containing several domains 
involved in specific chromatin interactions.

PMID: 22081970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24659. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024659. Epub 2011 Sep 15.

Pax6 represses androgen receptor-mediated transactivation by inhibiting
recruitment of the coactivator SPBP.

Elvenes J(1), Thomassen EI, Johnsen SS, Kaino K, Sjøttem E, Johansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cancer Research Group, Institute of Medical Biology, University of
Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway.

The androgen receptor (AR) has a central role in development and maintenance of
the male reproductive system and in the etiology of prostate cancer. The
transcription factor Pax6 has recently been reported to act as a repressor of AR 
and to be hypermethylated in prostate cancer cells. SPBP is a transcriptional
regulator that previously has been shown to enhance the activity of Pax6. In this
study we have identified SPBP to act as a transcriptional coactivator of AR. We
also show that Pax6 inhibits SPBP-mediated enhancement of AR activity on the AR
target gene probasin promoter, a repression that was partly reversed by increased
expression of SPBP. Enhanced expression of Pax6 reduced the amount of SPBP
associated with the probasin promoter when assayed by ChIP in HeLa cells. We
mapped the interaction between both AR and SPBP, and AR and Pax6 to the
DNA-binding domains of the involved proteins. Further binding studies revealed
that Pax6 and SPBP compete for binding to AR. These results suggest that Pax6
represses AR activity by displacing and/or inhibiting recruitment of coactivators
to AR target promoters. Understanding the mechanism for inhibition of AR
coactivators can give rise to molecular targeted drugs for treatment of prostate 
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3174178
PMID: 21935435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(19):6648-62. Epub 2007 Oct 2.

The ePHD protein SPBP interacts with TopBP1 and together they co-operate to
stimulate Ets1-mediated transcription.

Sjøttem E(1), Rekdal C, Svineng G, Johnsen SS, Klenow H, Uglehus RD, Johansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department and Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Institute
of Medical Biology, University of Tromsø, 9037 Tromsø, Norway.

SPBP (Stromelysin-1 PDGF responsive element binding protein) is a ubiquitously
expressed 220 kDa nuclear protein shown to enhance or repress the transcriptional
activity of various transcription factors. A yeast two-hybrid screen, with the
extended plant homeodomain (ePHD) of SPBP as bait, identified TopBP1
(topoisomerase II beta-binding protein 1) as a candidate interaction partner of
SPBP. TopBP1 has eight BRCA1 carboxy-terminal (BRCT) domains and is involved in
DNA replication, DNA damage responses and in the regulation of gene expression.
The interaction between SPBP and TopBP1 was confirmed in vitro and in vivo, and
was found to be mediated by the ePHD domain of SPBP and the BRCT6 domain of
TopBP1. Both SPBP and TopBP1 enhanced the transcriptional activity of Ets1 on the
c-myc P1P2- and matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP3) promoters. Together they
displayed a more than additive effect. Both proteins were associated with these
promoters. The involvement of TopBP1 was dependent on the serine 1159
phosphorylation site, known to be important for transcriptional activation.
Depletion of endogenous SPBP by siRNA treatment reduced MMP3 secretion by 50% in 
phorbol ester-stimulated human fibroblasts. Taken together, our results show that
TopBP1 and SPBP interact physically and functionally to co-operate as
co-activators of Ets1.

PMCID: PMC2095823
PMID: 17913746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Int J Oncol. 2006 Sep;29(3):567-75.

Gene expression profiles of small-cell lung cancers: molecular signatures of lung
cancer.

Taniwaki M(1), Daigo Y, Ishikawa N, Takano A, Tsunoda T, Yasui W, Inai K, Kohno
N, Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

To characterize the molecular mechanisms involved in the carcinogenesis and
progression of small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) and identify molecules to be applied
as novel diagnostic markers and/or for development of molecular-targeted drugs,
we applied cDNA microarray profile analysis coupled with purification of cancer
cells by laser-microbeam microdissection (LMM). Expression profiles of 32,256
genes in 15 SCLCs identified 252 genes that were commonly up-regulated and 851
transcripts that were down-regulated in SCLC cells compared with non-cancerous
lung tissue cells. An unsupervised clustering algorithm applied to the expression
data easily distinguished SCLC from the other major histological type of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and identified 475 genes that may represent
distinct molecular features of each of the two histological types. In particular,
SCLC was characterized by altered expression of genes related to neuroendocrine
cell differentiation and/or growth such as ASCL1, NRCAM, and INSM1. We also
identified 68 genes that were abundantly expressed both in advanced SCLCs and
advanced adenocarcinomas (ADCs), both of which had been obtained from patients
with extensive chemotherapy treatment. Some of them are known to be transcription
factors and/or gene expression regulators such as TAF5L, TFCP2L4, PHF20, LMO4,
TCF20, RFX2, and DKFZp547I048 as well as those encoding nucleotide-binding
proteins such as C9orf76, EHD3, and GIMAP4. Our data provide valuable information
for better understanding of lung carcinogenesis and chemoresistance.

PMID: 16865272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Cell Sci. 2006 Apr 15;119(Pt 8):1494-503. Epub 2006 Mar 14.

An N-terminally acetylated Arf-like GTPase is localised to lysosomes and affects 
their motility.

Hofmann I(1), Munro S.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 2QH, UK.

Small GTPases of the Arf and Rab families play key roles in the function of
subcellular organelles. Each GTPase is usually found on only one compartment and,
hence, they confer organelle specificity to many intracellular processes.
However, there has so far been little evidence for specific GTPases present on
lysosomes. Here, we report that two closely related human Arf-like GTPases, Arl8a
and Arl8b (also known as Arl10b/c and Gie1/2), localise to lysosomes in mammalian
cells, with the single homologue in Drosophila cells having a similar location.
Conventionally, membrane binding of Arf and Arl proteins is mediated by both an
N-terminal myristoyl group and an N-terminal amphipathic helix that is inserted
into the lipid bilayer upon activation of the GTPase. Arl8a and Arl8b do not have
N-terminal myristoylation sites, and we find that Arl8b is instead N-terminally
acetylated, and an acetylated methionine is necessary for its lysosomal
localization. Overexpression of Arl8a or Arl8b results in a microtubule-dependent
redistribution of lysosomes towards the cell periphery. Live cell imaging shows
that lysosomes move more frequently both toward and away from the cell periphery,
suggesting a role for Arl8a and Arl8b as positive regulators of lysosomal
transport.

PMID: 16537643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Pathol. 2006 Mar;208(4):543-53.

A gene expression signature that distinguishes desmoid tumours from nodular
fasciitis.

Bacac M(1), Migliavacca E, Stehle JC, McKee T, Delorenzi M, Coindre JM, Guillou
L, Stamenkovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, University Institute of Pathology,
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Nodular fasciitis (NF) is a rapidly growing cellular mass composed of
fibroblasts/myofibroblasts, usually localized in subcutaneous tissues, that
typically undergoes fibrosis and almost never recurs. Desmoid tumours (DTs) are
rare forms of fibroblastic/myofibroblastic growth that arise in deep soft
tissues, display a propensity for local infiltration and recurrence, but fail to 
metastasize. Given that both entities are primarily fibroblastic/myofibroblastic 
lesions with overlapping histological features, their gene expression profiles
were compared to identify differentially expressed genes that may provide not
only potential diagnostic markers, but also clues as to the pathogenesis of each 
disorder. Differentially expressed transcripts (89 clones displaying increased
expression in DTs and 246 clones displaying increased expression in NF) included 
genes encoding several receptor and non-receptor tyrosine kinases (EPHB3, PTPRF, 
GNAZ, SYK, LYN, EPHA4, BIRC3), transcription factors (TWIST1, PITX2, EYA2, OAS1, 
MITF, TCF20), and members of the Wnt signalling pathway (AXIN2, WISP1, SFRP).
Remarkably, almost one-quarter of the differentially expressed genes encode
proteins associated with inflammation and tissue remodelling, including members
of the interferon (IFN), tumour necrosis factor (TNF), and transforming growth
factor beta (TGF-beta) signalling pathways as well as metalloproteinases (MMP1,
9, 13, 23), urokinase plasminogen activator (PLAU), and cathepsins. The
observations provide the first comparative molecular characterization of desmoid 
tumours and nodular fasciitis and suggest that selected tyrosine kinases,
transcription factors, and members of the Wnt, TGF-beta, IFN, and TNF signalling 
pathways may be implicated in influencing and distinguishing their fate.

PMID: 16440290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 May;25(9):3421-30.

SPBP is a phosphoserine-specific repressor of estrogen receptor alpha.

Gburcik V(1), Bot N, Maggiolini M, Picard D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Sciences III, University of Geneva, 30 quai
Ernest-Ansermet, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Multiple signaling pathways stimulate the activity of estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha) by direct phosphorylation within its N-terminal activation function 1
(AF1). How phosphorylation affects AF1 activity remains poorly understood. We
performed a phage display screen for human proteins that are exclusively
recruited to the phosphorylated form of AF1 and found the stromelysin-1
platelet-derived growth factor-responsive element-binding protein (SPBP). In a
purified system, SPBP bound only the in vitro-phosphorylated form of the ERalpha 
AF1 or the phosphoserine mimic S118E, and the interaction domain could be mapped 
to a 42-amino-acid fragment of SPBP. In cells, SPBP preferentially interacted
with liganded and phosphorylated ERalpha. Functionally, SPBP behaved as a
repressor of activated ERalpha, which extends its previously demonstrated roles
as a DNA binding transactivation factor and coactivator of other transcription
factors. By targeting the phosphorylated form of AF1, SPBP may contribute to
attenuating and fine-tuning ERalpha activity. A functional consequence is that
SPBP inhibits the proliferation of ERalpha-dependent but not ERalpha-independent 
breast cancer cell lines, mirroring a reported negative correlation with the
ERalpha status of breast tumors.

PMCID: PMC1084313
PMID: 15831449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 22;275(51):40288-300.

The nuclear factor SPBP contains different functional domains and stimulates the 
activity of various transcriptional activators.

Rekdal C(1), Sjøttem E, Johansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Medical Biology, University of
Tromso, 9037 Tromso, Norway.

SPBP (stromelysin-1 platelet-derived growth factor-responsive element binding
protein) was originally cloned from a cDNA expression library by virtue of its
ability to bind to a platelet-derived growth factor-responsive element in the
human stromelysin-1 promoter. A 937-amino acid-long protein was deduced from a
3995-nucleotide murine cDNA sequence. By analyses of both human and murine cDNAs,
we now show that SPBP is twice as large as originally found. The human SPBP gene 
contains six exons and is located on chromosome 22q13.1-13.3. Two isoforms
differing in their C termini are expressed due to alternative splicing. PCR
analyses of multitissue cDNA panels showed that SPBP is expressed in most tissues
except for ovary and prostate. Functional mapping revealed that SPBP is a
nuclear, multidomain protein containing an N-terminal region with transactivating
ability, a novel type of DNA-binding domain containing an AT hook motif, and a
bipartite nuclear localization signal as well as a C-terminal zinc finger domain.
This type of zinc finger domain is also found in the trithorax family of
chromatin-based transcriptional regulator proteins. Using cotransfection
experiments, we find that SPBP enhances the transcriptional activity of various
transcription factors such as c-Jun, Ets1, Sp1, and Pax6. Hence, SPBP seems to
act as a transcriptional coactivator.

PMID: 10995766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 25;275(34):26144-9.

Interaction between the transcription factor SPBP and the positive cofactor RNF4.
An interplay between protein binding zinc fingers.

Lyngsø C(1), Bouteiller G, Damgaard CK, Ryom D, Sanchez-Muñoz S, Nørby PL, Bonven
BJ, Jørgensen P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Structural Biology, University of Aarhus, C. F.
Mollers Alle 130, DK-8000 Aarhus C., Denmark.

The activator of stromelysin 1 gene transcription, SPBP, interacts with the RING 
finger protein RNF4. Both proteins are ubiquitously expressed and localized in
the nucleus. RNF4 facilitates accumulation of specific SPBP-DNA complexes in
vitro and acts as a positive cofactor in SPBP-mediated transactivation. SPBP
harbors an internal zinc finger of the PHD/LAP type. This domain can form
intra-chain protein-protein contacts in SPBP resulting in negative modulation of 
SPBP-RNF4 interaction.

PMID: 10849425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;81(3-4):176-7.

Assignment of AR1, transcription factor 20 (TCF20), to human chromosome 22q13.3
with somatic cell hybrids and in situ hybridization.

Rajadhyaksha A(1), Rivière M, Van Vooren P, Szpirer J, Szpirer C, Babin J, Bina
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.

PMID: 9730594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


