
1. Fertil Steril. 2011 Apr;95(5):1584-8.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.01.018.
Epub 2011 Feb 12.

Copy number variants on the X chromosome in women with primary ovarian
insufficiency.

Knauff EA(1), Blauw HM, Pearson PL, Kok K, Wijmenga C, Veldink JH, van den Berg
LH, Bouchard P, Fauser BC, Franke L; Dutch Primary Ovarian Insufficiency
Consortium.

Collaborators: Goverde AJ, Laven JS, Lambalk CB, Ten Kate Booij MJ, Hoek A,
Beerendonk CC, Van Kasteren YM, Helmerhorst FM, Land JA, Franke HR, van der
Linden PJ, Van Dop PA, Van Der Veen F, Cohlen BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine and Gynecology, Rudolf Magnus Institute of
Neuroscience, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
knauff@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether submicroscopic copy number variants (CNVs) on
the X chromosome can be identified in women with primary ovarian insufficiency
(POI), defined as spontaneous secondary amenorrhea before 40 years of age
accompanied by follicle-stimulating hormone levels above 40 IU/L on at least two 
occasions.
DESIGN: Analysis of intensity data of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) probes
generated by genomewide Illumina 370k CNV BeadChips, followed by the validation
of identified loci using a custom designed ultra-high-density comparative genomic
hybridization array containing 48,325 probes evenly distributed over the X
chromosome.
SETTING: Multicenter genetic cohort study in the Netherlands.
PATIENT(S): 108 Dutch Caucasian women with POI, 97 of whom passed quality
control, who had a normal karyogram and absent fragile X premutation, and 235
healthy Dutch Caucasian women as controls.
INTERVENTION(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Amount and locus of X chromosomal microdeletions or
duplications.
RESULT(S): Intensity differences between SNP probes identify microdeletions and
duplications. The initial analysis identified an overrepresentation of deletions 
in POI patients. Moreover, CNVs in two genes on the Xq21.3 locus (i.e., PCDH11X
and TGIF2LX) were statistically significantly associated with the POI phenotype. 
Mean size of identified CNVs was 262 kb. However, in the validation study the
identified putative Xq21.3 deletions samples did not show deviations in
intensities in consecutive probes.
CONCLUSION(S): X chromosomal submicroscopic CNVs do not play a major role in
Caucasian POI patients. We provide guidelines on how submicroscopic cytogenetic
POI research should be conducted.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21316664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Genet Genomics. 2008 Aug;35(8):457-65. doi: 10.1016/S1673-8527(08)60063-6.

Transgenic analyses of TGIF family proteins in Drosophila imply their role in
cell growth.

Wang Y(1), Wang L, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics
and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

TG-interacting factors (TGIFs) belong to a family of TALE-homeodomain proteins
including TGIF, TGIF2, and TGIF2LX/Y (TGIF2 like on X or Y chromosome) in human. 
They potentially play important functions in various tissues during development. 
Mutations in TGIF are frequently associated with malformation of forebrain and
facial structures; TGIF2 proteins are over-expressed in many ovarian cancer cell 
lines; and TGIF2LX/Y are specifically expressed in adult testis. The molecular
functions of these proteins have been investigated mostly in cultured cells. TGIF
and TGIF2 have been found as transcriptional repressors that modulate TGF-beta
signaling. However, these findings are far from sufficient to explain their
mutant phenotypes or expression patterns, and the functions of TGIF2LX/Y have
never been reported. Here we use Drosophila as a model system to explore the
functions of TGIF family proteins in vivo. We observed in fly tissues such as fat
body, epithelia, and neuronal cells, that expressing human TGIF2 or human TGIF2LX
generally inhibited cell growth in size and number. Co-expressing Drosophila Myc,
Cyclin E, or human c-MycS partially rescued the growth inhibition induced by
human TGIFs, whereas activated insulin pathway signaling did not. Taken together,
we provide in vivo evidence for the potential functions of human TGIF2 and
TGIF2LX in growth control. Additionally, we confirmed that Drosophila TGIFs are
transcriptional activators by assaying their activities in spermatogenesis.

PMID: 18721782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


