
1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Feb 23. pii: jbc.M115.704973. [Epub ahead of print]

Complex effects of the ZSCAN21 transcription factor on transcriptional regulation
of a-synuclein in primary neuronal cultures and in vivo.

Dermentzaki G(1), Paschalidis N(1), Politis PK(1), Stefanis L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Greece. (2)Biomedical
Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Greece lstefanis@bioacademy.gr.

a-synuclein, a presynaptic neuronal protein encoded by the SNCA gene, is strongly
implicated in Parkinson's disease (PD). PD pathogenesis is linked to increased
SNCA levels; however the transcriptional elements that control SNCA expression
are still elusive. Previous experiments in PC12 cells demonstrated that the
transcription factor (TF) zinc finger and SCAN domain containing 21 (ZSCAN21)
plays an important regulatory role in SNCA transcription. Currently, we
characterized the role of ZSCAN21 in SNCA transcription in primary neuronal
cultures and in vivo. We found that ZSCAN21 is developmentally expressed in
neurons in different rat brain regions. We confirmed its binding in the intron 1 
region of SNCA in rat cortical cultures. Lentiviral-mediated silencing of ZSCAN21
increased significantly SNCA promoter activity, mRNA, and protein levels in such 
cultures. In contrast, ZSCAN21 silencing reduced SNCA in neurosphere cultures.
Interestingly, ZSCAN21 overexpression in cortical neurons led to robust mRNA but 
negligible protein expression, suggesting that ZSCAN21 protein levels are tightly
regulated post-transcriptionally and/or post-translationally in primary neurons. 
Efficient adeno-associated viral-mediated knock-down of ZSCAN21 in the postnatal 
and adult hippocampus, an area linked with non-motor PD symptoms, revealed no
significant alterations in SNCA levels. Overall, our study demonstrates that
ZSCAN21 is involved in the transcriptional regulation of SNCA in primary neuronal
cultures, but the direction of the effect is variable, likely depending on
neuronal maturation. However, the unaltered SNCA levels observed following
ZSCAN21 downregulation in the rat brain, possibly due to compensatory mechanisms,
imply that ZSCAN21 is not a master regulator of SNCA in vivo.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26907683  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Neurosci Lett. 2015 Jul 10;599:140-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.05.029. Epub
2015 May 19.

Transcriptional regulation of the a-synuclein gene in human brain tissue.

Brenner S(1), Wersinger C(2), Gasser T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Department of Neurodegenerative 
diseases, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. Electronic address:
brenner.steffen@googlemail.com. (2)Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, 
Department of Neurodegenerative diseases, University of Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany; German Center for Neurodegenerative diseases (DZNE), Tübingen, Germany.

The transcriptional regulation of the gene encoding a-synuclein (SNCA) is thought
to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD), as
common genetic variability in this gene is associated with an elevated risk of
developing PD. However, the relevant mechanisms are still poorly understood. So
far, only few proteins have been identified as transcription factors (TFs) of
SNCA in cellular models. Here we show that two of these TFs bind to the DNA in
human brain tissue: the zinc finger protein ZSCAN21 occupies a region within SNCA
intron 1, as described before, while GATA2 occupies a specific region within
intron 2, where we have identified a new binding site within the complex
structure of the 5'-promoter region of SNCA. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays confirmed these binding sites. Genetic investigations revealed no
polymorphisms or mutations within these sites. A better understanding of TF-DNA
interactions within SNCA may allow to develop novel therapies designed to reduce 
a-synuclein levels.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26002080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2013 Nov;57:33-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2013.09.002. Epub 2013
Sep 27.

Counter-regulation of alpha- and beta-synuclein expression at the transcriptional
level.

Wright JA(1), McHugh PC, Pan S, Cunningham A, Brown DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath, United
Kingdom.

Alpha-synuclein is a cytosolic protein associated with a range of diseases
including Parkinson's disease. In these diseases alpha-synuclein aggregates and
this is believed to play a causative role in disease progression. Alpha-synuclein
aggregation has been suggested to be caused by increased expression levels and
has also been suggested to be countered by increased beta-synuclein expression.
In this regard, strategies to counter-regulate the expression of the synucleins
by increasing beta-synuclein expression relative to alpha-synuclein may be
beneficial in preventing disease progression. We therefore studied the regulation
of alpha-synuclein to try to identify pathways that might counter-regulate the
synucleins. We identified members of the ZSCAN family of transcription factors as
specific repressors of alpha-synuclein. In particular ZSCAN21 was found to both
repress alpha-synuclein and increase beta-synuclein expression. These findings
support the notion that a single pathway in the cell can counter-regulate the
expression of the synucleins. Support for this came from experiments that showed 
that ZSCAN21 expression decreases alpha-synuclein aggregation in the cells.

© 2013.

PMID: 24080388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Neurochem. 2009 Sep;110(5):1479-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06250.x. Epub
2009 Jun 22.

Functional dissection of the alpha-synuclein promoter: transcriptional regulation
by ZSCAN21 and ZNF219.

Clough RL(1), Dermentzaki G, Stefanis L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Neuroscience, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy 
of Athens, Athens 11527, Greece. lclough@bioacademy.gr

Alpha-synuclein (SNCA) is an abundant neuronal protein involved in synaptic
neurotransmission. SNCA expression levels have been strongly implicated in
Parkinson's disease pathogenesis. We have previously demonstrated that in the
PC12 cell line elements in intron 1 may mediate SNCA transcriptional regulation
in response to neurotrophins. We have now identified transcription factor (TF)
binding sites in intron 1 and the 5'-promoter of SNCA. A binding site for the TF 
zinc finger and SCAN domain containing (ZSCAN)21 in the 5'-region of intron 1 is 
required for intron 1 transcriptional activity. Small interfering RNA against
ZSCAN21 inhibits activation in the luciferase assay and diminishes SNCA protein
levels in naïve and neurotrophin-treated PC12 cells and in primary cultured
cortical neurons, demonstrating that ZSCAN21 is a novel transcriptional regulator
of SNCA in neuronal cells. The 5'-promoter of SNCA has a complex architecture,
including multiple binding sites for the TF zinc finger protein (ZNF)219, which
functions as both an activator and a repressor. Targeting ZSCAN21 or other TFs
controlling SNCA transcriptional activity may provide novel therapeutic avenues
not only for Parkinson's disease but also for other synucleopathies.

PMID: 19549071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Genome Res. 2009 Jun;19(6):1133-40. doi: 10.1101/gr.088120.108. Epub 2009 Apr 17.

High resolution mapping of expression QTLs in heterogeneous stock mice in
multiple tissues.

Huang GJ(1), Shifman S, Valdar W, Johannesson M, Yalcin B, Taylor MS, Taylor JM, 
Mott R, Flint J.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom.

A proportion of the genetic variants underlying complex phenotypes do so through 
their effects on gene expression, so an important challenge in complex trait
analysis is to discover the genetic basis for the variation in transcript
abundance. So far, the potential of mapping both quantitative trait loci (QTLs)
and expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) in rodents has been limited by the
low mapping resolution inherent in crosses between inbred strains. We provide a
megabase resolution map of thousands of eQTLs in hippocampus, lung, and liver
samples from heterogeneous stock (HS) mice in which 843 QTLs have also been
mapped at megabase resolution. We exploit dense mouse SNP data to show that
artifacts due to allele-specific hybridization occur in approximately 30% of the 
cis-acting eQTLs and, by comparison with exon expression data, we show that
alternative splicing of the 3' end of the genes accounts for <1% of cis-acting
eQTLs. Approximately one third of cis-acting eQTLs and one half of trans-acting
eQTLs are tissue specific. We have created an important systems biology resource 
for the genetic analysis of complex traits in a key model organism.

PMCID: PMC2694476
PMID: 19376938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Brain Res. 2007 Dec;1186:29-40. Epub 2007 Sep 8.

Characterization of a cerebellar granule progenitor cell line, EtC.1, and its
responsiveness to 17-beta-estradiol.

Gottfried-Blackmore A(1), Croft G, Clark J, McEwen BS, Jellinck PH, Bulloch K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroendocrinology, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Mouse cerebellar development occurs at late embryonic stages and through the
first few weeks of postnatal life. Hormones such as 17-beta-estradiol (E2) have
been implicated in cerebellar development, through the expression of E2 receptors
(ER). However, the role of E2 in the development and function of cerebellar
neurons has yet to be fully elucidated. To gain insight into E2's actions on the 
developing cerebellum, we characterized a cloned neuronal cell line, E(t)C.1,
derived from late embryonic cerebellum for its neural properties and
responsiveness to E2. Our results revealed that E(t)C.1 cells express markers
characteristic of neural progenitor cells such as Nestin, Musashi, and
Doublecortin (DCX), and of the granule cell lineage such as Math1 and Zipro1. The
ER alpha and beta (ERalpha and ERbeta) were also identified in this cell line.
Functionality of ERs was verified using an Estrogen Response Element
(ERE)-Luciferase reporter plasmid. E2 modulated ERalpha, FMRP, and IL-6, which
were expressed in these cells. However, E2 did not induce changes in neural
proteins nor induce maturation of E(t)C.1 cells. CREB and ERK(1/2) protein
kinases were not modulated by E2 either. Interestingly, E(t)C.1 expressed active 
p450 Aromatase (P450arom), which was confirmed by the aromatization of
androstenedione (AD) to E2 and other estrogen metabolites. Collectively, our
results show that the E(t)C.1 cell line may serve as a model to study early
development of cerebellar progenitor granule cells, and their responsiveness to
E2.

PMID: 17980864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Apr 28;343(1):260-8. Epub 2006 Mar 3.

Spectroscopic characterization of the tumor antigen NY-REN-21 and identification 
of heterodimer formation with SCAND1.

Carneiro FR(1), Silva TC, Alves AC, Haline-Vaz T, Gozzo FC, Zanchin NI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Structural Molecular Biology, Brazilian Synchrotron Light
Laboratory, LNLS, Rua Giuseppe Maximo Scolfaro 10000, P.O. Box 6192, CEP
13084-971, Campinas SP, Brazil.

Human NY-REN-21 is a C2H2 type multi-finger protein, with a SCAN domain in the
N-terminal region and a predicted coil central region. It represents a putative
ortholog of mouse ZFP38, a transcriptional factor that recognizes a bipartite DNA
motif and is unable to form homodimers. As shown in this work, NY-REN-21 contains
a SCAN domain able to form homodimers and a central region that behaves as an
intrinsically disordered protein. The SCAN domain is found in 71 human proteins
and its ability to form homo- and heterodimers widens the number of genes that
are regulated by this group of transcription factors. NY-REN-21 interaction with 
SCAND1 was identified using the yeast two-hybrid system and confirmed using
recombinant proteins. SCAND1 is a truncated SCAN box protein, lacking the zinc
finger region and the NY-REN-21/SCAND1 heterodimer is asymmetric concerning the
DNA binding region. This result indicates that NY-REN-21 can function either as a
homodimer or as a heterodimer with SCAND1.

PMID: 16540086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Neurosci. 2002 Aug 15;22(16):7132-46.

Specification of cerebellar progenitors after heterotopic-heterochronic
transplantation to the embryonic CNS in vivo and in vitro.

Carletti B(1), Grimaldi P, Magrassi L, Rossi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Rita Levi Montalcini Center for Brain Repair,
University of Turin, I-10125 Turin, Italy.

The different cerebellar phenotypes are generated according to a precise time
schedule during embryonic and postnatal development. To assess whether the
differentiative potential of cerebellar progenitors is progressively restricted
in space and time we examined the fate of embryonic day 12 (E12) or postnatal day
4 (P4) cerebellar cells after heterotopic-heterochronic transplantation into the 
embryonic rat brain in utero or into organotypic CNS explants in vitro. Donor
cells, isolated from transgenic mice overexpressing the enhanced-green
fluorescent protein under the control of the beta-actin-promoter, engrafted
throughout the host brainstem and diencephalon, whereas they rarely incorporated 
into specific telencephalic structures. In any recipient site, the vast majority 
of transplanted cells could be recognized as cerebellar phenotypes, and we did
not obtain clear evidence that ectopically located cells adopted host-specific
identities. Nevertheless, the two donor populations displayed different
developmental potentialities. P4 progenitors exclusively generated granule cells 
and molecular layer interneurons, indicating that they are committed to
late-generated cerebellar identities and not responsive to
heterotopic-heterochronic environmental cues. In contrast, E12 precursors had the
potential to produce all major cerebellar neurons, but the repertoire of adult
phenotypes generated by these cells was different in distinct host regions,
suggesting that they require instructive environmental information to acquire
mature identities. Thus, cerebellar precursors are able to integrate into
different foreign brain regions, where they develop mature phenotypes that
survive long after transplantation, but they are committed to cerebellar fates at
E12. Embryonic progenitors are initially capable, although likely not competent, 
to generate all cerebellar identities, but their potential is gradually
restricted toward late-generated phenotypes.

PMID: 12177209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Nat Genet. 1999 Aug;22(4):327-35.

BAC-mediated gene-dosage analysis reveals a role for Zipro1 (Ru49/Zfp38) in
progenitor cell proliferation in cerebellum and skin.

Yang XW(1), Wynder C, Doughty ML, Heintz N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1999 Aug;22(4):319-20.

Genetic analysis in mice has most commonly employed two general strategies:
phenotypic screens for spontaneous or induced mutations and genotypic analysis
using homologous recombination or gene trapping to produce deletion or insertion 
mutants. Here we use bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)-mediated gene-dosage
analysis in transgenic mice to reveal novel genetic functions that are not
evident from conventional loss-of-function mutations. We demonstrate a role for
the zinc-finger transcription factor Zipro1 (formerly Ru49 and Zfp38) in the
proliferation of granule cell precursors in the developing cerebellum, and
document the contribution of this process to the final stages of cerebellar
morphogenesis. We also show that Zipro1 is expressed in skin, and increased
Zipro1 dosage results in a hair-loss phenotype associated with increased
epithelial cell proliferation and abnormal hair follicle development.

PMID: 10431235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nat Genet. 1999 Aug;22(4):319-20.

Gene dosage in mice--BAC to the future.

Magdaleno SM, Curran T.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 1999 Aug;22(4):327-35.

PMID: 10431229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Nat Biotechnol. 1997 Sep;15(9):859-65.

Homologous recombination based modification in Escherichia coli and germline
transmission in transgenic mice of a bacterial artificial chromosome.

Yang XW(1), Model P, Heintz N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021,
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Biotechnol. 1997 Sep;15(9):839.

Escherichia coli-based artificial chromosomes have become important tools for
physical mapping and sequencing in various genome projects. The lack of a general
method to modify these large bacterial clones, however, has limited their utility
in functional studies. We developed a simple method to modify bacterial
artificial chromosomes directly in the recombination-deficient E. coli host
strain by homologous recombination for in vivo studies. The IRES-LacZ marker gene
was introduced into a 131 kb BAC containing the murine zinc finger gene, RU49. No
rearrangements or deletions were detected in the modified BACs. Furthermore,
transgenic mice were generated by pronuclear injection of the modified BAC, and
germline transmission of the intact BAC has been obtained. Proper expression of
the lacZ transgene in the brain has been observed, which could not be obtained
with conventional transgenic constructs.

PMID: 9306400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Neuron. 1996 Sep;17(3):389-99.

Embryonic precursor cells from the rhombic lip are specified to a cerebellar
granule neuron identity.

Alder J(1), Cho NK, Hatten ME.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Rockefeller University New York, New
York 10021-6399, USA.

The specification of diverse classes of neurons is critical to the development of
the cerebellar cortex. Here, we describe the purification of early embryonic
precursors of cerebellar granule neurons from the rhombic lip, the dorsal aspect 
of the midbrain/hindbrain region. Isolation of rhombic lip cells reveals a
homogenous population of precursor cells that express general neuronal markers
and the granule cell marker RU49, but fail to extend neurites or express
differentiation markers. Differentiation is induced by coculture with external
germinal layer (EGL) cells, or their membranes, suggesting that a local inducing 
factor acts after formation of the EGL. Thus, proliferating precursors within the
rhombic lip are specified to be granule cells very early, with the availability
of an inducing factor increasing over the course of development.

PMID: 8816703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Development. 1996 Feb;122(2):555-66.

Granule cell specification in the developing mouse brain as defined by expression
of the zinc finger transcription factor RU49.

Yang XW(1), Zhong R, Heintz N.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Rockefeller 
University, New York, New York 10021, USA.

The creation of specific neuronal cell types within the developing brain is a
critical and unsolved biological problem. Precedent from invertebrate
development, and from vertebrate myogenesis and lymphogenesis, has established
that cell specification often involves transcription factors that are expressed
throughout the differentiation of a given cell type. In this study, we have
identified in Zn2+ finger transcription factor RU49 as a definitive marker for
the cerebellar granule neuron lineage. Thus, RU49 is expressed in the earliest
granule cell progenitors at the rhombic lip as they separate from the ventricular
zone of the neural tube to generate a secondary proliferative matrix, and it
continues to be expressed in differentiating and mature granule neurons.
Proliferating granule cell progenitors isolated from the rhombic lip at E14 or
from the external germinal layer at P6 continue to express RU49 in vitro. Both
the olfactory bulb and dentate gyrus granule cell lineages also express this
factor as they are generated with the developing brain. RU49 binds a novel
bipartite DNA-binding element in a manner consistent with chemical rules
governing the DNA-binding specificity of this class of transcription factor. The 
novel biochemical properties of RU49 and its restricted expression within the
three lineages of CNS granule neurons suggest that RU49 may play a critical role 
in their specification. Furthermore, these results raise the interesting
possibility that the generation of these three neuronal populations to form
displaced germinative zones within the developing brain may reflect their use of 
a common developmental mechanism involving RU49.

PMID: 8625807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mech Dev. 1992 Dec;39(3):129-42.

The ubiquitous transactivator Zfp-38 is upregulated during spermatogenesis with
differential transcription.

Chowdhury K(1), Goulding M, Walther C, Imai K, Fickenscher H.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Göttingen, FRG.

We describe the complete nucleotide sequence of a full length cDNA clone encoding
a new mouse zinc finger protein gene, Zfp-38 and localize it on chromosome 5 by
the interspecific backcross analysis. The N-terminal domain of the Zfp-38 protein
(64 kDa) contains 358 amino acids and the C-terminal domain of 197 residues
encodes 7 zinc fingers. We also present evidence that Zfp-38 is a strong
transcriptional activator. The transactivation domain was localized in the non
finger region and a fusion protein containing 112 amino acid residues from this
region of the Zfp-38 and the DNA binding domain of the yeast Gal 4 protein, very 
efficiently transactivated the expression of a reporter CAT plasmid, harboring
the Gal4 target site. By in situ hybridization and northern blotting technique,
the Zfp-38 transcript can be detected at a highly elevated level during
spermatogenesis. Its expression accompanies the progression from pachytene
spermatocytes to round spermatids. The undifferentiated spermatogonia or the
haploid elongated spermatid and the spermatozoa do not show any detectable level 
of the transcript. Interestingly, other tissues express low levels of a slightly 
shorter transcript with a different 5' end as determined by RNase protection. The
presence of both a transcriptional activating domain and 7 DNA binding zinc
fingers, coupled with the cell type(s) specific expression pattern, suggests that
Zfp-38 has the potential to regulate transcription during spermatogenesis.

PMID: 1284028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


